Godel's  Proof 


Gddel's 
Proof 


by 

Ernest  Nagel 

and 

James  R.  Newman 




New  York  University  Press 1958 


(g)    1958   BY    ERNEST   NAGEL   AND   JAMES   R.    NEWMAN 
LIBRARY    OF    CONGRESS   CATALOG   CARD    NUMBER    58-561O 
MANUFACTURED    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA 


i 


% 


v 


to 

Bertrand  Russell 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


httparchive.orgdetailsgdelsproofOOnage 


Contents 

Acknowledgments  ix 

i     Introduction  3 

11     The  Problem  of  Consistency  8 

111     Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency  26 

iv     The  Systematic  Codification  of  Formal  Logic  37 

v    An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of 

Consistency  45 

vi     The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics       57 

vii     Godel's  Proofs  68 

a     Godel  numbering  68 

b     The  arithmetization  of  meta-mathematics  76 

c    The  heart  of  Godel's  argument  85 

viii     Concluding  Reflections  98 

Appendix  Notes  103 

Brief  Bibliography  115 

Index  117 


vii 


Acknowledgments 

The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  generous 
assistance  they  received  from  Professor  John  C.  Cooley 
of  Columbia  University.  He  read  critically  an  early 
draft  of  the  manuscript,  and  helped  to  clarify  the  struc- 
ture of  the  argument  and  to  improve  the  exposition  of 
points  in  logic.  We  wish  to  thank  Scientific  American 
for  permission  to  reproduce  several  of  the  diagrams  in 
the  text,  which  appeared  in  an  article  on  Godel's  Proof 
in  the  June  1956  issue  of  the  magazine.  We  are  in- 
debted to  Professor  Morris  Kline  of  New  York  Univer- 
sity for  helpful  suggestions  regarding  the  manuscript. 


IX 


Godel's  Proof 


I 


Introduction 

In  1931  there  appeared  in  a  German  scientific  peri- 
odical a  relatively  short  paper  with  the  forbidding  title 
Uber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia 
Mathematica  und  verwandter  Systeme  (On  Formally 
Undecidable  Propositions  of  Principia  Mathematica 
and  Related  Systems).  Its  author  was  Kurt  Godel, 
then  a  young  mathematician  of  25  at  the  University  of 
Vienna  and  since  1938  a  permanent  member  of  the  In- 
stitute for  Advanced  Study  at  Princeton.  The  paper  is 
a  milestone  in  the  history  of  logic  and  mathematics. 
When  Harvard  University  awarded  Godel  an  honor- 
ary degree  in  1952,  the  citation  described  the  work  as 
one  of  the  most  important  advances  in  logic  in  modern 
times. 

At  the  time  of  its  appearance,  however,  neither  the 
title  of  Godel's  paper  nor  its  content  was  intelligible  to 
most  mathematicians.  The  Principia  Mathematica 
mentioned  in  the  title  is  the  monumental  three-vol- 
ume treatise  by  Alfred  North  Whitehead  and  Bertrand 
Russell  on  mathematical  logic  and  the  foundations  of 

3 


4     Godel's  Proof 

mathematics;  and  familiarity  with  that  work  is  not  a 
prerequisite  to  successful  research  in  most  branches  of 
mathematics.  Moreover,  Godel's  paper  deals  with  a  set 
of  questions  that  has  never  attracted  more  than  a  com- 
paratively small  group  of  students.  The  reasoning  of 
the  proof  was  so  novel  at  the  time  of  its  publication 
that  only  those  intimately  conversant  with  the  tech- 
nical literature  of  a  highly  specialized  field  could  fol- 
low the  argument  with  ready  comprehension.  Never- 
theless, the  conclusions  Godel  established  are  now 
widely  recognized  as  being  revolutionary  in  their 
broad  philosophical  import.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  present 
essay  to  make  the  substance  of  Godel's  findings  and  the 
general  character  of  his  proof  accessible  to  the  non- 
specialist. 

Godel's  famous  paper  attacked  a  central  problem  in 
the  foundations  of  mathematics.  It  will  be  helpful  to 
give  a  brief  preliminary  account  of  the  context  in 
which  the  problem  occurs.  Everyone  who  has  been  ex- 
posed to  elementary  geometry  will  doubtless  recall 
that  it  is  taught  as  a  deductive  discipline.  It  is  not 
presented  as  an  experimental  science  whose  theorems 
are  to  be  accepted  because  they  are  in  agreement  with 
observation.  This  notion,  that  a  proposition  may  be 
established  as  the  conclusion  of  an  explicit  logical 
proof,  goes  back  to  the  ancient  Greeks,  who  discovered 
what  is  known  as  the  axiomatic  method  and  used  it 
to  develop  geometry  in  a  systematic  fashion.  The 
axiomatic  method  consists  in  accepting  without  proof 
certain  propositions  as  axioms  or  postulates  (e.g.,  the 


Introduction     5 

axiom  that  through  two  points  just  one  straight  line 
can  be  drawn),  and  then  deriving  from  the  axioms  all 
other  propositions  of  the  system  as  theorems.  The 
axioms  constitute  the  ''foundations  of  the  system;  the 
theorems  are  the  superstructure,  and  are  obtained 
from  the  axioms  with  the  exclusive  help  of  principles 
of  logic. 

The  axiomatic  development  of  geometry  made  a 
powerful  impression  upon  thinkers  throughout  the 
ages;  for  the  relatively  small  number  of  axioms  carry 
the  whole  weight  of  the  inexhaustibly  numerous  prop- 
ositions derivable  from  them.  Moreover,  if  in  some 
way  the  truth  of  the  axioms  can  be  established — and, 
indeed,  for  some  two  thousand  years  most  students  be- 
lieved without  question  that  they  are  true  of  space — 
both  the  truth  and  the  mutual  consistency  of  all  the 
theorems  are  automatically  guaranteed.  For  these  rea- 
sons the  axiomatic  form  of  geometry  appeared  to  many 
generations  of  outstanding  thinkers  as  the  model  of 
scientific  knowledge  at  its  best.  It  was  natural  to  ask, 
therefore,  whether  other  branches  of  thought  besides 
geometry  can  be  placed  upon  a  secure  axiomatic  foun- 
dation. However,  although  certain  parts  of  physics 
were  given  an  axiomatic  formulation  in  antiquity 
(e.g.,  by  Archimedes),  until  modern  times  geometry 
was  the  only  branch  of  mathematics  that  had  what 
most  students  considered  a  sound  axiomatic  basis. 

But  within  the  past  two  centuries  the  axiomatic 
method  has  come  to  be  exploited  with  increasing 
power  and  vigor.    New  as  well  as  old  branches  of 


6     Godel's  Proof 

mathematics,  including  the  familiar  arithmetic  of 
cardinal  (or  ' 'whole)  numbers,  were  supplied  with 
what  appeared  to  be  adequate  sets  of  axioms.  A  climate 
of  opinion  was  thus  generated  in  which  it  was  tacitly 
assumed  that  each  sector  of  mathematical  thought  can 
be  supplied  with  a  set  of  axioms  sufficient  for  develop- 
ing systematically  the  endless  totality  of  true  proposi- 
tions about  the  given  area  of  inquiry. 

Godel's  paper  showed  that  this  assumption  is  un- 
tenable. He  presented  mathematicians  with  the  astound- 
ing and  melancholy  conclusion  that  the  axiomatic 
method  has  certain  inherent  limitations,  which  rule 
out  the  possibility  that  even  the  ordinary  arithmetic  of 
the  integers  can  ever  be  fully  axiomatized.  What  is 
more,  he  proved  that  it  is  impossible  to  establish  the 
internal  logical  consistency  of  a  very  large  class  of 
deductive  systems — elementary  arithmetic,  for  ex- 
ample— unless  one  adopts  principles  of  reasoning  so 
complex  that  their  internal  consistency  is  as  open  to 
doubt  as  that  of  the  systems  themselves.  In  the  light  of 
these  conclusions,  no  final  systematization  of  many  im- 
portant areas  of  mathematics  is  attainable,  and  no  abso- 
lutely impeccable  guarantee  can  be  given  that  many 
significant  branches  of  mathematical  thought  are  en- 
tirely free  from  internal  contradiction. 

Godel's  findings  thus  undermined  deeply  rooted 
preconceptions  and  demolished  ancient  hopes  that 
were  being  freshly  nourished  by  research  on  the  foun- 
dations of  mathematics.  But  his  paper  was  not  alto- 
gether negative.  It  introduced  into  the  study  of  foun- 


Introduction     7 

dation  questions  a  new  technique  of  analysis  compara- 
ble in  its  nature  and  fertility  with  the  algebraic  method 
that  Rene  Descartes  introduced  into  geometry.  This 
technique  suggested  and  initiated  new  problems  for 
logical  and  mathematical  investigation.  It  provoked  a 
reappraisal,  still  under  way,  of  widely  held  philoso- 
phies of  mathematics,  and  of  philosophies  of  knowl- 
edge in  general. 

The  details  of  Godel's  proofs  in  his  epoch-making 
paper  are  too  difficult  to  follow  without  considerable 
mathematical  training.  But  the  basic  structure  of  his 
demonstrations  and  the  core  of  his  conclusions  can  be 
made  intelligible  to  readers  with  very  limited  mathe- 
matical and  logical  preparation.  To  achieve  such  an 
understanding,  the  reader  may  find  useful  a  brief  ac- 
count of  certain  relevant  developments  in  the  history 
of  mathematics  and  of  modern  formal  logic.  The  next 
four  sections  of  this  essay  are  devoted  to  this  survey. 


II 


The  Problem  of  Consistency 

The  nineteenth  century  witnessed  a  tremendous  ex- 
pansion and  intensification  of  mathematical  research. 
Many  fundamental  problems  that  had  long  withstood 
the  best  efforts  of  earlier  thinkers  were  solved;  new 
departments  of  mathematical  study  were  created;  and 
in  various  branches  of  the  discipline  new  foundations 
were  laid,  or  old  ones  entirely  recast  with  the  help  of 
more  precise  techniques  of  analysis.  To  illustrate  the 
Greeks  had  proposed  three  problems  in  elementary 
geometry  with  compass  and  straight-edge  to  trisect 
any  angle,  to  construct  a  cube  with  a  volume  twice  the 
volume  of  a  given  cube,  and  to  construct  a  square 
equal  in  area  to  that  of  a  given  circle.  For  more  than 
2,000  years  unsuccessful  attempts  were  made  to  solve 
these  problems;  at  last,  in  the  nineteenth  century  it 
was  proved  that  the  desired  constructions  are  logically 
impossible.  There  was,  moreover,  a  valuable  by-prod- 
uct of  these  labors.  Since  the  solutions  depend  es- 
sentially upon  determining  the  kind  of  roots  that  sat- 
isfy certain  equations,   concern  with  the  celebrated 

8 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     9 

exercises  set  in  antiquity  stimulated  profound  investi- 
gations into  the  nature  of  number  and  the  structure  of 
the  number  continuum.  Rigorous  definitions  were 
eventually  supplied  for  negative,  complex,  and  irra- 
tional numbers;  a  logical  basis  was  constructed  for  the 
real  number  system;  and  a  new  branch  of  mathematics, 
the  theory  of  infinite  numbers,  was  founded. 

But  perhaps  the  most  significant  development  in  its 
long-range  effects  upon  subsequent  mathematical  his- 
tory was  the  solution  of  another  problem  that  the 
Greeks  raised  without  answering.  One  of  the  axioms 
Euclid  used  in  systematizing  geometry  has  to  do  with 
parallels.  The  axiom  he  adopted  is  logically  equivalent 
to  (though  not  identical  with)  the  assumption  that 
through  a  point  outside  a  given  line  only  one  parallel 
to  the  line  can  be  drawn.  For  various  reasons,  this 
axiom  did  not  appear  ' 'self-evident  to  the  ancients. 
They  sought,  therefore,  to  deduce  it  from  the  other 
Euclidean  axioms,  which  they  regarded  as  clearly  self- 
evident.1    Can  such  a  proof  of  the  parallel  axiom  be 


1  The  chief  reason  for  this  alleged  lack  of  self-evidence  seems 
to  have  been  the  fact  that  the  parallel  axiom  makes  an  asser- 
tion about  infinitely  remote  regions  of  space.  Euclid  defines 
parallel  lines  as  straight  lines  in  a  plane  that,  being  pro- 
duced indefinitely  in  both  directions,  do  not  meet.  Accord- 
ingly, to  say  that  two  lines  are  parallel  is  to  make  the  claim 
that  the  two  lines  will  not  meet  even  at  infinity.  But  the 
ancients  were  familiar  with  lines  that,  though  they  do  not 
intersect  each  other  in  any  finite  region  of  the  plane,  do  meet 
at  infinity.  Such  lines  are  said  to  be  asymptotic.  Thus,  a 
hyperbola  is  asymptotic  to  its  axes.    It  was  therefore  not  in- 


io     Godel's  Proof 

given  Generations  of  mathematicians  struggled  with 
this  question,  without  avail.  But  repeated  failure  to 
construct  a  proof  does  not  mean  that  none  can  be 
found  any  more  than  repeated  failure  to  find  a  cure  for 
the  common  cold  establishes  beyond  doubt  that  man- 
kind will  forever  suffer  from  running  noses.  It  was  not 
until  the  nineteenth  century,  chiefly  through  the  work 
of  Gauss,  Bolyai,  Lobachevsky,  and  Riemann,  that  the 
impossibility  of  deducing  the  parallel  axiom  from  the 
others  was  demonstrated.  This  outcome  was  of  the 
greatest  intellectual  importance.  In  the  first  place,  it 
called  attention  in  a  most  impressive  way  to  the  fact 
that  a  proof  can  be  given  of  the  impossibility  of  prov- 
ing certain  propositions  within  a  given  system.  As  we 
shall  see,  Godel's  paper  is  a  proof  of  the  impossibility 
of  demonstrating  certain  important  propositions  in 
arithmetic.  In  the  second  place,  the  resolution  of  the 
parallel  axiom  question  forced  the  realization  that 
Euclid  is  not  the  last  word  on  the  subject  of  geometry, 
since  new  systems  of  geometry  can  be  constructed  by 
using  a  number  of  axioms  different  from,  and  incom- 
patible with,  those  adopted  by  Euclid.  In  particular, 
as  is  well  known,  immensely  interesting  and  fruitful 
results  are  obtained  when  Euclid's  parallel  axiom  is  re- 
placed by  the  assumption  that  more  than  one  parallel 
can  be  drawn  to  a  given  line  through  a  given  point,  or, 
alternatively,  by  the  assumption  that  no  parallels  can 


tuitively  evident  to  the  ancient  geometers  that  from  a  point 
outside  a  given  straight  line  only  one  straight  line  can  be 
drawn  that  will  not  meet  the  given  line  even  at  infinity. 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     11 

be  drawn.  The  traditional  belief  that  the  axioms  of 
geometry  (or,  for  that  matter,  the  axioms  of  any  dis- 
cipline) can  be  established  by  their  apparent  self-evi- 
dence was  thus  radically  undermined.  Moreover,  it 
gradually  became  clear  that  the  proper  business  of  the 
pure  mathematician  is  to  derive  theorems  from  postu- 
lated assumptions,  and  that  it  is  not  his  concern  as  a 
mathematician  to  decide  whether  the  axioms  he  as- 
sumes are  actually  true.  And,  finally,  these  successful 
modifications  of  orthodox  geometry  stimulated  the  re- 
vision and  completion  of  the  axiomatic  bases  for  many 
other  mathematical  systems.  Axiomatic  foundations 
were  eventually  supplied  for  fields  of  inquiry  that  had 
hitherto  been  cultivated  only  in  a  more  or  less  intui- 
tive manner.  (See  Appendix,  no.  1.) 

The  over-all  conclusion  that  emerged  from  these 
critical  studies  of  the  foundations  of  mathematics  is 
that  the  age-old  conception  of  mathematics  as  the 
science  of  quantity  is  both  inadequate  and  mislead- 
ing. For  it  became  evident  that  mathematics  is  simply 
the  discipline  par  excellence  that  draws  the  conclu- 
sions logically  implied  by  any  given  set  of  axioms  or 
postulates.  In  fact,  it  came  to  be  acknowledged  that 
the  validity  of  a  mathematical  inference  in  no  sense  de- 
pends upon  any  special  meaning  that  may  be  associated 
with  the  terms  or  expressions  contained  in  the  postu- 
lates. Mathematics  was  thus  recognized  to  be  much 
more  abstract  and  formal  than  had  been  traditionally 
supposed  more  abstract,  because  mathematical  state- 
ments can  be  construed  in  principle  to  be  about  any- 


12     Godel's  Proof 

thing  whatsoever  rather  than  about  some  inherently 
circumscribed  set  of  objects  or  traits  of  objects;  and 
more  formal,  because  the  validity  of  mathematical 
demonstrations  is  grounded  in  the  structure  of  state- 
ments, rather  than  in  the  nature  of  a  particular  subject 
matter.  The  postulates  of  any  branch  of  demonstrative 
mathematics  are  not  inherently  about  space,  quantity, 
apples,  angles,  or  budgets;  and  any  special  meaning 
that  may  be  associated  with  the  terms  (or  descriptive 
predicates)  in  the  postulates  plays  no  essential  role  in 
the  process  of  deriving  theorems.  We  repeat  that  the 
sole  question  confronting  the  pure  mathematician 
(as  distinct  from  the  scientist  who  employs  mathe- 
matics in  investigating  a  special  subject  matter)  is  not 
whether  the  postulates  he  assumes  or  the  conclusions 
he  deduces  from  them  are  true,  but  whether  the 
alleged  conclusions  are  in  fact  the  necessary  logical 
consequences  of  the  initial  assumptions. 

Take  this  example.  Among  the  undefined  (or 
primitive)  terms  employed  by  the  influential  Ger- 
man mathematician  David  Hilbert  in  his  famous 
axiomatization  of  geometry  (first  published  in  1899) 
are  'point',  'line',  'lies  on',  and  'between'.  We  may 
grant  that  the  customary  meanings  connected  with 
these  expressions  play  a  role  in  the  process  of  discover- 
ing and  learning  theorems.  Since  the  meanings  are 
familiar,  we  feel  we  understand  their  various  interre- 
lations, and  they  motivate  the  formulation  and  selec- 
tion of  axioms;  moreover,  they  suggest  and  facilitate 
the  formulation  of  the  statements  we  hope  to  establish 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     13 

as  theorems.  Yet,  as  Hilbert  plainly  states,  insofar  as 
we  are  concerned  with  the  primary  mathematical  task 
of  exploring  the  purely  logical  relations  of  dependence 
between  statements,  the  familiar  connotations  of  the 
primitive  terms  are  to  be  ignored,  and  the  sole  mean- 
ings that  are  to  be  associated  with  them  are  those  as- 
signed by  the  axioms  into  which  they  enter.2  This  is 
the  point  of  Russell's  famous  epigram  pure  mathe- 
matics is  the  subject  in  which  we  do  not  know  what  we 
are  talking  about,  or  whether  what  we  are  saying  is 
true. 

A  land  of  rigorous  abstraction,  empty  of  all  familiar 
landmarks,  is  certainly  not  easy  to  get  around  in.  But 
it  offers  compensations  in  the  form  of  a  new  freedom  of 
movement  and  fresh  vistas.  The  intensified  formaliza- 
tion of  mathematics  emancipated  men's  minds  from 
the  restrictions  that  the  customary  interpretation  of 
expressions  placed  on  the  construction  of  novel  systems 
of  postulates.  New  kinds  of  algebras  and  geometries 
were  developed  which  marked  significant  departures 
from  the  mathematics  of  tradition.  As  the  meanings  of 
certain  terms  became  more  general,  their  use  became 
broader  and  the  inferences  that  could  be  drawn  from 
them  less  confined.  Formalization  led  to  a  great  variety 
of  systems  of  considerable  mathematical  interest  and 


2  In  more  technical  language,  the  primitive  terms  are  im- 
plicitly defined  by  the  axioms,  and  whatever  is  not  covered 
by  the  implicit  definitions  is  irrelevant  to  the  demonstration 
of  theorems. 


14    Godel's  Proof 

value.  Some  of  these  systems,  it  must  be  admitted,  did 
not  lend  themselves  to  interpretations  as  obviously  in- 
tuitive (i.e.,  commonsensical)  as  those  of  Euclidean 
geometry  or  arithmetic,  but  this  fact  caused  no  alarm. 
Intuition,  for  one  thing,  is  an  elastic  faculty  our  chil- 
dren will  probably  have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  as 
intuitively  obvious  the  paradoxes  of  relativity,  just  as 
we  do  not  boggle  at  ideas  that  were  regarded  as  wholly 
unintuitive  a  couple  of  generations  ago.  Moreover,  as 
we  all  know,  intuition  is  not  a  safe  guide  it  cannot 
properly  be  used  as  a  criterion  of  either  truth  or  fruit- 
fulness  in  scientific  explorations. 

However,  the  increased  abstractness  of  mathematics 
raised  a  more  serious  problem.  It  turned  on  the  ques- 
tion whether  a  given  set  of  postulates  serving  as  foun- 
dation of  a  system  is  internally  consistent,  so  that  no 
mutually  contradictory  theorems  can  be  deduced  from 
the  postulates.  The  problem  does  not  seem  pressing 
when  a  set  of  axioms  is  taken  to  be  about  a  definite 
and  familiar  domain  of  objects;  for  then  it  is  not  only 
significant  to  ask,  but  it  may  be  possible  to  ascertain, 
whether  the  axioms  are  indeed  true  of  these  objects. 
Since  the  Euclidean  axioms  were  generally  supposed 
to  be  true  statements  about  space  (or  objects  in  space), 
no  mathematician  prior  to  the  nineteenth  century  ever 
considered  the  question  whether  a  pair  of  contra- 
dictory theorems  might  some  day  be  deduced  from  the 
axioms.  The  basis  for  this  confidence  in  the  consistency 
of  Euclidean  geometry  is  the  sound  principle  that  logi- 
cally  incompatible   statements   cannot   be   simultane- 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     15 

ously  true;  accordingly,  if  a  set  of  statements  is  true 
(and  this  was  assumed  of  the  Euclidean  axioms),  these 
statements  are  mutually  consistent. 

The  non-Euclidean  geometries  were  clearly  in  a 
different  category.  Their  axioms  were  initially  re- 
garded as  being  plainly  false  of  space,  and,  for  that 
matter,  doubtfully  true  of  anything;  thus  the  problem 
of  establishing  the  internal  consistency  of  non-Eu- 
clidean systems  was  recognized  to  be  both  formidable 
and  critical.  In  Riemannian  geometry,  for  example, 
Euclid's  parallel  postulate  is  replaced  by  the  assump- 
tion that  through  a  given  point  outside  a  line  no  paral- 
lel to  it  can  be  drawn.  Now  suppose  the  question  Is  the 
Riemannian  set  of  postulates  consistent  The  postu- 
lates are  apparently  not  true  of  the  space  of  ordinary 
experience.  How,  then,  is  their  consistency  to  be 
shown  How  can  one  prove  they  will  not  lead  to  con- 
tradictory theorems  Obviously  the  question  is  not 
settled  by  the  fact  that  the  theorems  already  deduced 
do  not  contradict  each  other — for  the  possibility  re- 
mains that  the  very  next  theorem  to  be  deduced  may 
upset  the  apple  cart.  But,  until  the  question  is  settled, 
one  cannot  be  certain  that  Riemannian  geometry  is  a 
true  alternative  to  the  Euclidean  system,  i.e.,  equally 
valid  mathematically.  The  very  possibility  of  non-Eu- 
clidean geometries  was  thus  contingent  on  the  reso- 
lution of  this  problem. 

A  general  method  for  solving  it  was  devised.  The 
underlying  idea  is  to  find  a  ' 'model  (or  interpreta- 
tion) for  the  abstract  postulates  of  a  system,  so  that 


16     GodeVs  Proof 

each  postulate  is  converted  into  a  true  statement  about 
the  model.  In  the  case  of  Euclidean  geometry,  as  we 
have  noted,  the  model  was  ordinary  space.  The  method 
was  used  to  find  other  models,  the  elements  of  which 
could  serve  as  crutches  for  determining  the  consistency 
of  abstract  postulates.  The  procedure  goes  something 
like  this.  Let  us  understand  by  the  word  'class'  a  col- 
lection or  aggregate  of  distinguishable  elements,  each 
of  which  is  called  a  member  of  the  class.  Thus,  the 
class  of  prime  numbers  less  than  10  is  the  collection 
whose  members  are  2,  3,  5,  and  7.  Suppose  the  follow- 
ing set  of  postulates  concerning  two  classes  K  and  L, 
whose  special  nature  is  left  undetermined  except  as 
implicitly  defined  by  the  postulates 

1 .  Any  two  members  of  K  are  contained  in 
just  one  member  of  L. 

2.  No  member  of  K  is  contained  in  more 
than  two  members  of  L. 

3.  The  members  of  K  are  not  all  contained 
in  a  single  member  of  L. 

4.  Any  two  members  of  L  contain  just  one 
member  of  K . 

5.  No  member  of  L  contains  more  than 
two  members  of  K. 

From  this  small  set  we  can  derive,  by  using  cus- 
tomary rules  of  inference,  a  number  of  theorems.  For 
example,  it  can  be  shown  that  K  contains  just  three 
members.  But  is  the  set  consistent,  so  that  mutually 
contradictory   theorems   can   never   be   derived   from 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     17 

it    The  question  can  be  answered  readily  with  the 
help  of  the  following  model 

Let  K  be  the  class  of  points  consisting  of 
the  vertices  of  a  triangle,  and  L  the  class  of 
lines  made  up  of  its  sides;  and  let  us  under- 
stand the  phrase  'a  member  of  K  is  contained 
in  a  member  of  L'  to  mean  that  a  point  which 
is  a  vertex  lies  on  a  line  which  is  a  side.  Each 
of  the  five  abstract  postulates  is  then  con- 
verted into  a  true  statement.  For  instance, 
the  first  postulate  asserts  that  any  two  points 
which  are  vertices  of  the  triangle  lie  on  just 
one  line  which  is  a  side.  (See  Fig.  1.)  In  this 
way  the  set  of  postulates  is  proved  to  be  con- 
sistent. 

K 


L 

Fig.  1. 

Model  for  a  set  of  postulates  about  two  classes,  K  and  L,  is  a 
triangle  whose  vertices  are  the  members  of  K  and  whose  sides 
are  the  members  of  L.  The  geometrical  model  shows  that  the 
postulates  are  consistent. 

The  consistency  of  plane  Riemannian  geometry  can 
also,  ostensibly,  be  established  by  a  model  embodying 


18     Godel's  Proof 

the  postulates.  We  may  interpret  the  expression 
'plane'  in  the  Riemannian  axioms  to  signify  the  sur- 
face of  a  Euclidean  sphere,  the  expression  'point'  a 
point  on  this  surface,  the  expression  'straight  line'  an 
arc  of  a  great  circle  on  this  surface,  and  so  on.  Each 
Riemannian  postulate  is  then  converted  into  a  theorem 
of  Euclid.  For  example,  on  this  interpretation  the 
Riemannian  parallel  postulate  reads  Through  a  point 
on  the  surface  of  a  sphere,  no  arc  of  a  great  circle  can 
be  drawn  parallel  to  a  given  arc  of  a  great  circle.  (See 
Fig.  2.) 

At  first  glance  this  proof  of  the  consistency  of  Rie- 
mannian geometry  may  seem  conclusive.  But  a  closer 
look  is  disconcerting.  For  a  sharp  eye  will  discern  that 
the  problem  has  not  been  solved;  it  has  merely  been 
shifted  to  another  domain.  The  proof  attempts  to  set- 
tle the  consistency  of  Riemannian  geometry  by  appeal- 
ing to  the  consistency  of  Euclidean  geometry.  What 
emerges,  then,  is  only  this  Riemannian  geometry  is 
consistent  if  Euclidean  geometry  is  consistent.  The 
authority  of  Euclid  is  thus  invoked  to  demonstrate  the 
consistency  of  a  system  which  challenges  the  exclusive 
validity  of  Euclid.  The  inescapable  question  is  Are 
the  axioms  of  the  Euclidean  system  itself  consistent 

An  answer  to  this  question,  hallowed,  as  we  have 
noted,  by  a  long  tradition,  is  that  the  Euclidean  axioms 
are  true  and  are  therefore  consistent.   This  answer  is 

Fig.  2 

The  non-Euclidean  geometry  of  Bernhard  Riemann  can  be 
represented  by  a  Euclidean  model.  The  Riemannian  plane  be- 
comes the  surface  of  a  Euclidean  sphere,  points  on  the  plane 


become  points  on  this  surface,  straight  lines  in  the  plane  be- 
come great  circles.  Thus,  a  portion  of  the  Riemannian  plane 
bounded  by  segments  of  straight  lines  is  depicted  as  a  portion 
of  the  sphere  bounded  by  parts  of  great  circles  (center).  Two 
line  segments  in  the  Riemannian  plane  are  two  segments  of 
great  circles  on  the  Euclidean  sphere  (bottom),  and  these,  if 
extended,  indeed  intersect,  thus  contradicting  the  parallel 
postulate. 


20     Godel's  Proof 

no  longer  regarded  as  acceptable;  we  shall  return  to  it 
presently  and  explain  why  it  is  unsatisfactory.  An- 
other answer  is  that  the  axioms  jibe  with  our  actual, 
though  limited,  experience  of  space  and  that  we  are 
justified  in  extrapolating  from  the  small  to  the  uni- 
versal. But,  although  much  inductive  evidence  can  be 
adduced  to  support  this  claim,  our  best  proof  would  be 
logically  incomplete.  For  even  if  all  the  observed 
facts  are  in  agreement  with  the  axioms,  the  possibility 
is  open  that  a  hitherto  unobserved  fact  may  contradict 
them  and  so  destroy  their  title  to  universality.  In- 
ductive considerations  can  show  no  more  than  that  the 
axioms  are  plausible  or  probably  true. 

Hilbert  tried  yet  another  route  to  the  top.  The  clue 
to  his  way  lay  in  Cartesian  coordinate  geometry.  In 
his  interpretation  Euclid's  axioms  were  simply  trans- 
formed into  algebraic  truths.  For  instance,  in  the 
axioms  for  plane  geometry,  construe  the  expression 
'point'  to  signify  a  pair  of  numbers,  the  expression 
'straight  line'  the  (linear)  relation  between  numbers 
expressed  by  a  first  degree  equation  with  two  un- 
knowns, the  expression  'circle'  the  relation  between 
numbers  expressed  by  a  quadratic  equation  of  a  certain 
form,  and  so  on.  The  geometric  statement  that  two 
distinct  points  uniquely  determine  a  straight  line  is 
then  transformed  into  the  algebraic  truth  that  two 
distinct  pairs  of  numbers  uniquely  determine  a  linear 
relation;  the  geometric  theorem  that  a  straight  line 
intersects  a  circle  in  at  most  two  points,  into  the 
algebraic  theorem  that  a  pair  of  simultaneous  equa- 
tions in  two  unknowns  (one  of  which  is  linear  and  the 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     21 

other  quadratic  of  a  certain  type)  determine  at  most 
two  pairs  of  real  numbers;  and  so  on.  In  brief,  the  con- 
sistency of  the  Euclidean  postulates  is  established  by 
showing  that  they  are  satisfied  by  an  algebraic  model. 
This  method  of  establishing  consistency  is  powerful 
and  effective.  Yet  it,  too,  is  vulnerable  to  the  objection 
already  set  forth.  For,  again,  a  problem  in  one  domain 
is  resolved  by  transferring  it  to  another.  Hilbert's 
argument  for  the  consistency  of  his  geometric  postu- 
lates shows  that  if  algebra  is  consistent,  so  is  his  geo- 
metric system.  The  proof  is  clearly  relative  to  the  as- 
sumed consistency  of  another  system  and  is  not  an 
absolute  proof. 

In  the  various  attempts  to  solve  the  problem  of  con- 
sistency there  is  one  persistent  source  of  difficulty.  It 
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  axioms  are  interpreted  by 
models  composed  of  an  infinite  number  of  elements. 
This  makes  it  impossible  to  encompass  the  models  in  a 
finite  number  of  observations;  hence  the  truth  of  the 
axioms  themselves  is  subject  to  doubt.  In  the  induc- 
tive argument  for  the  truth  of  Euclidean  geometry,  a 
finite  number  of  observed  facts  about  space  are  pre- 
sumably in  agreement  with  the  axioms.  But  the  con- 
clusion that  the  argument  seeks  to  establish  involves 
an  extrapolation  from  a  finite  to  an  infinite  set  of  data. 
How  can  we  justify  this  jump  On  the  other  hand,  the 
difficulty  is  minimized,  if  not  completely  eliminated, 
where  an  appropriate  model  can  be  devised  that  con- 
tains only  a  finite  number  of  elements.  The  triangle 
model  used  to  show  the  consistency  of  the  five  abstract 
postulates  for  the  classes  K  and  L  is  finite;  and  it  is 


22     Godel's  Proof 

comparatively  simple  to  determine  by  actual  inspec- 
tion whether  all  the  elements  in  the  model  actually 
satisfy  the  postulates,  and  thus  whether  they  are  true 
(and  hence  consistent).  To  illustrate  by  examining  in 
turn  all  the  vertices  of  the  model  triangle,  one  can 
learn  whether  any  two  of  them  lie  on  just  one  side — so 
that  the  first  postulate  is  established  as  true.  Since  all 
the  elements  of  the  model,  as  well  as  the  relevant  re- 
lations among  them,  are  open  to  direct  and  exhaustive 
inspection,  and  since  the  likelihood  of  mistakes  oc- 
curring in  inspecting  them  is  practically  nil,  the  con- 
sistency of  the  postulates  in  this  case  is  not  a  matter 
for  genuine  doubt. 

Unfortunately,  most  of  the  postulate  systems  that 
constitute  the  foundations  of  important  branches  of 
mathematics  cannot  be  mirrored  in  finite  models.  Con- 
sider the  postulate  in  elementary  arithmetic  which  as- 
serts that  every  integer  has  an  immediate  successor 
differing  from  any  preceding  integer.  It  is  evident  that 
the  model  needed  to  test  the  set  to  which  this  postulate 
belongs  cannot  be  finite,  but  must  contain  an  infinity 
of  elements.  It  follows  that  the  truth  (and  so  the  con- 
sistency) of  the  set  cannot  be  established  by  an  ex- 
haustive inspection  of  a  limited  number  of  elements. 
Apparently  we  have  reached  an  impasse.  Finite  models 
suffice,  in  principle,  to  establish  the  consistency  of  cer- 
tain sets  of  postulates;  but  these  are  of  slight  mathe- 
matical importance.  Non-finite  models,  necessary  for 
the  interpretation  of  most  postulate  systems  of  mathe- 
matical significance,  can  be  described  only  in  general 
terms;  and  we  cannot  conclude  as  a  matter  of  course 


The  Problem  of  Consistency     23 

that  the  descriptions  are  free  from  concealed  contra- 
dictions. 

It  is  tempting  to  suggest  at  this  point  that  we  can  be 
sure  of  the  consistency  of  formulations  in  which  non- 
finite  models  are  described  if  the  basic  notions  em- 
ployed are  transparently  ' 'clear  and  distinct.  But 
the  history  of  thought  has  not  dealt  kindly  with  the 
doctrine  of  clear  and  distinct  ideas,  or  with  the  doc- 
trine of  intuitive  knowledge  implicit  in  the  suggestion. 
In  certain  areas  of  mathematical  research  in  which 
assumptions  about  infinite  collections  play  central 
roles,  radical  contradictions  have  turned  up,  in  spite  of 
the  intuitive  clarity  of  the  notions  involved  in  the  as- 
sumptions and  despite  the  seemingly  consistent  char- 
acter of  the  intellectual  constructions  performed.  Such 
contradictions  (technically  referred  to  as  antinomies) 
have  emerged  in  the  theory  of  infinite  numbers,  de- 
veloped by  Georg  Cantor  in  the  nineteenth  century; 
and  the  occurrence  of  these  contradictions  has  made 
plain  that  the  apparent  clarity  of  even  such  an  ele- 
mentary notion  as  that  of  class  (or  aggregate)  does  not 
guarantee  the  consistency  of  any  particular  system 
built  on  it.  Since  the  mathematical  theory  of  classes, 
which  deals  with  the  properties  and  relations  of  ag- 
gregates or  collections  of  elements,  is  often  adopted  as 
the  foundation  for  other  branches  of  mathematics,  and 
in  particular  for  elementary  arithmetic,  it  is  pertinent 
to  ask  whether  contradictions  similar  to  those  en- 
countered in  the  theory  of  infinite  classes  infect  the 
formulations  of  other  parts  of  mathematics. 

In  point  of  fact,  Bertrand  Russell  constructed  a  con- 


24     Godel's  Proof 

tradiction  within  the  framework  of  elementary  logic 
itself  that  is  precisely  analogous  to  the  contradiction 
first  developed  in  the  Cantorian  theory  of  infinite 
classes.  Russell's  antinomy  can  be  stated  as  follows. 
Classes  seem  to  be  of  two  kinds  those  which  do  not 
contain  themselves  as  members,  and  those  which  do. 
A  class  will  be  called  normal  if,  and  only  if,  it  does 
not  contain  itself  as  a  member;  otherwise  it  will  be 
called  ' 'non-normal.  An  example  of  a  normal  class  is 
the  class  of  mathematicians,  for  patently  the  class  itself 
is  not  a  mathematician  and  is  therefore  not  a  member 
of  itself.  An  example  of  a  non-normal  class  is  the  class 
of  all  thinkable  things;  for  the  class  of  all  thinkable 
things  is  itself  thinkable  and  is  therefore  a  member  of 
itself.  Let  'N'  by  definition  stand  for  the  class  of  all 
normal  classes.  We  ask  whether  N  itself  is  a  normal 
class.  If  N  is  normal,  it  is  a  member  of  itself  (for  by 
definition  N  contains  all  normal  classes);  but,  in  that 
case,  N  is  non-normal,  because  by  definition  a  class 
that  contains  itself  as  a  member  is  non-normal.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  N  is  non-normal,  it  is  a  member  of  it- 
self (by  definition  of  non-normal);  but,  in  that  case,  N 
is  normal,  because  by  definition  the  members  of  N  are 
normal  classes.  In  short,  N  is  normal  if,  and  only  if,  N 
is  non-normal.  It  follows  that  the  statement  'N  is 
normal'  is  both  true  and  false.  This  fatal  contradic- 
tion results  from  an  uncritical  use  of  the  apparently 
pellucid  notion  of  class.  Other  paradoxes  were  found 
later,  each  of  them  constructed  by  means  of  familiar 
and  seemingly  cogent  modes  of  reasoning.    Mathe- 


The  Problem  of  Consistency    25 

maticians  came  to  realize  that  in  developing  consistent 
systems  familiarity  and  intuitive  clarity  are  weak  reeds 
to  lean  on. 

We  have  seen  the  importance  of  the  problem  of  con- 
sistency, and  we  have  acquainted  ourselves  with  the 
classically  standard  method  for  solving  it  with  the  help 
of  models.  It  has  been  shown  that  in  most  instances 
the  problem  requires  the  use  of  a  non-finite  model,  the 
description  of  which  may  itself  conceal  inconsistencies. 
We  must  conclude  that,  while  the  model  method  is  an 
invaluable  mathematical  tool,  it  does  not  supply  a  final 
answer  to  the  problem  it  was  designed  to  solve. 


Ill 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency 

The  limitations  inherent  in  the  use  of  models  for  es- 
tablishing consistency,  and  the  growing  apprehension 
that  the  standard  formulations  of  many  mathematical 
systems  might  all  harbor  internal  contradictions,  led  to 
new  attacks  upon  the  problem.  An  alternative  to  rela- 
tive proofs  of  consistency  was  proposed  by  Hilbert.  He 
sought  to  construct  absolute  proofs,  by  which  the 
consistency  of  systems  could  be  established  without  as- 
suming the  consistency  of  some  other  system.  We  must 
briefly  explain  this  approach  as  a  further  preparation 
for  understanding  Godel's  achievement. 

The  first  step  in  the  construction  of  an  absolute 
proof,  as  Hilbert  conceived  the  matter,  is  the  complete 
formalization  of  a  deductive  system.  This  involves 
draining  the  expressions  occurring  within  the  system 
of  all  meaning  they  are  to  be  regarded  simply  as  empty 
signs.  How  these  signs  are  to  be  combined  and  manipu- 
lated is  to  be  set  forth  in  a  set  of  precisely  stated  rules. 
The  purpose  of  this  procedure  is  to  construct  a  system 
of  signs  (called  a  calculus)  which  conceals  nothing 

26 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency     27 

and  which  has  in  it  only  that  which  we  explicitly  put 
into  it.  The  postulates  and  theorems  of  a  completely 
formalized  system  are  strings  (or  finitely  long  se- 
quences) of  meaningless  marks,  constructed  according 
to  rules  for  combining  the  elementary  signs  of  the  sys- 
tem into  larger  wholes.  Moreover,  when  a  system  has 
been  completely  formalized,  the  derivation  of  theo- 
rems from  postulates  is  nothing  more  than  the  trans- 
formation (pursuant  to  rule)  of  one  set  of  such 
strings  into  another  set  of  strings.  In  this  way  the 
danger  is  eliminated  of  using  any  unavowed  principles 
of  reasoning.  Formalization  is  a  difficult  and  tricky 
business,  but  it  serves  a  valuable  purpose.  It  reveals 
structure  and  function  in  naked  clarity,  as  does  a  cut- 
away working  model  of  a  machine.  When  a  system  has 
been  formalized,  the  logical  relations  between  mathe- 
matical propositions  are  exposed  to  view;  one  is  able 
to  see  the  structural  patterns  of  various  strings  of 
meaningless  signs,  how  they  hang  together,  how 
they  are  combined,  how  they  nest  in  one  another,  and 
so  on. 

A  page  covered  with  the  meaningless  marks  of 
such  a  formalized  mathematics  does  not  assert  any- 
thing— it  is  simply  an  abstract  design  or  a  mosaic  pos- 
sessing a  determinate  structure.  Yet  it  is  clearly  possi- 
ble to  describe  the  configurations  of  such  a  system  and 
to  make  statements  about  the  configurations  and  their 
various  relations  to  one  another.  One  may  say  that  a 
string  is  pretty,  or  that  it  resembles  another  string, 
or  that  one  string  appears  to  be  made  up  of  three 


28    Godel's  Proof 

others,  and  so  on.  Such  statements  are  evidently  mean- 
ingful and  may  convey  important  information  about 
the  formal  system.  It  must  now  be  observed,  however, 
that  such  meaningful  statements  about  a  meaningless 
(or  formalized)  mathematical  system  plainly  do  not 
themselves  belong  to  that  system.  They  belong  to  what 
Hilbert  called  meta-mathematics,  to  the  language 
that  is  about  mathematics.  Meta-mathematical  state- 
ments are  statements  about  the  signs  occurring  within 
a  formalized  mathematical  system  (i.e.,  a  calculus) — 
about  the  kinds  and  arrangements  of  such  signs  when 
they  are  combined  to  form  longer  strings  of  marks 
called  formulas,  or  about  the  relations  between  for- 
mulas that  may  obtain  as  a  consequence  of  the  rules  of 
manipulation  specified  for  them. 

A  few  examples  will  help  to  an  understanding  of 
Hilbert's  distinction  between  mathematics  (i.e.,  a  sys- 
tem of  meaningless  signs)  and  meta-mathematics 
(meaningful  statements  about  mathematics,  the  signs 
occurring  in  the  calculus,  their  arrangement  and  re- 
lations).  Consider  the  expression 

2  +  3  =  5 
This  expression  belongs  to  mathematics  (arithmetic) 
and  is  constructed  entirely  out  of  elementary  arith- 
metical signs.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statement 

'2  +  3  —  5'  is  an  arithmetical  formula 

asserts  something  about  the  displayed  expression.  The 
statement  does  not  express  an  arithmetical  fact  and 
does  not  belong  to  the  formal  language  of  arithmetic; 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency     29 

it  belongs  to  meta-mathematics,  because  it  charac- 
terizes a  certain  string  of  arithmetical  signs  as  being  a 
formula.  The  following  statement  belongs  to  meta- 
mathematics 

If  the  sign  '='  is  to  be  used  in  a  formula  of 
arithmetic,  the  sign  must  be  flanked  both  left 
and  right  by  numerical  expressions. 

This  statement  lays  down  a  necessary  condition  for 
using  a  certain  arithmetical  sign  in  arithmetical  for- 
mulas the  structure  that  an  arithmetical  formula  must 
have  if  it  is  to  embody  that  sign. 
Consider  next  the  three  formulas 

0  =  0 
0^0 

Each  of  these  belongs  to  mathematics  (arithmetic),  be- 
cause each  is  built  up  entirely  out  of  arithmetical  signs. 
But  the  statement 

V  is  a  variable 

belongs  to  meta-mathematics,  since  it  characterizes  a 
certain  arithmetical  sign  as  belonging  to  a  specific 
class  of  signs  (i.e.,  to  the  class  of  variables).  Again,  the 
following  statement  belongs  to  meta-mathematics 

The  formula  '0  =  0'  is  derivable  from  the 
formula  'x  =  x'  by  substituting  the  numeral 
'0'  for  the  variable  V. 

It  specifies  in  what  manner  one  arithmetical  formula 


30     Godel's  Proof 

can  be  obtained  from  another  formula,  and  thereby 
describes  how  the  two  formulas  are  related  to  each 
other.   Similarly,  the  statement 

'0  =£  0'  is  not  a  theorem 

belongs  to  meta-mathematics,  for  it  says  of  a  certain 
formula  that  it  is  not  derivable  from  the  axioms  of 
arithmetic,  and  thus  asserts  that  a  certain  relation  does 
not  hold  between  the  indicated  formulas  of  the  system. 
Finally,  the  next  statement  belongs  to  meta-mathe- 
matics 

Arithmetic  is  consistent 

(i.e.,  it  is  not  possible  to  derive  from  the  axioms  of 
arithmetic  two  formally  contradictory  formulas — for 
example,  the  formulas  '0  =  0'  and  '0^0').  This  is 
patently  about  arithmetic,  and  asserts  that  pairs  of 
formulas  of  a  certain  sort  do  not  stand  in  a  specific  re- 
lation to  the  formulas  that  constitute  the  axioms  of 
arithmetic.3 


3  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  meta-mathematical  statements 
given  in  the  text  do  not  contain  as  constituent  parts  of  them- 
selves any  of  the  mathematical  signs  and  formulas  that  ap- 
pear in  the  examples.  At  first  glance  this  assertion  seems 
palpably  untrue,  for  the  signs  and  formulas  are  plainly  visi- 
ble. But,  if  the  statements  are  examined  with  an  analytic  eye, 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  point  is  well  taken.  The  meta-mathe- 
matical statements  contain  the  names  of  certain  arithmetical 
expressions,  but  not  the  arithmetical  expressions  themselves. 
The  distinction  is  subtle  but  both  valid  and  important.  It 
arises  out  of  the  circumstance  that  the  rules  of  English 
grammar  require  that  no  sentence  literally  contain  the  ob- 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency     31 

It  may  be  that  the  reader  finds  the  word  'meta- 
mathematics'  ponderous  and  the  concept  puzzling. 
We  shall  not  argue  that  the  word  is  pretty;  but  the  con- 
cept itself  will  perplex  no  one  if  we  point  out  that  it  is 
used  in  connection  with  a  special  case  of  a  well-known 
distinction,  namely  between  a  subject  matter  under 
study  and  discourse  about  the  subject  matter.  The 
statement  'among  phalaropes  the  males  incubate  the 
eggs'  pertains  to  the  subject  matter  investigated  by  zo- 
ologists, and  belongs  to  zoology;  but  if  we  say  that  this 
assertion  about  phalaropes  proves  that  zoology  is  ir- 
rational, our  statement  is  not  about  phalaropes,  but 
about  the  assertion  and  the  discipline  in  which  it  oc- 


jects  to  which  the  expressions  in  the  sentence  may  refer,  but 
only  the  names  of  such  objects.  Obviously,  when  we  talk 
about  a  city  we  do  not  put  the  city  itself  into  a  sentence,  but 
only  the  name  of  the  city;  and,  similarly,  if  we  wish  to  say 
something  about  a  word  (or  other  linguistic  sign),  it  is  not  the 
word  itself  (or  the  sign)  that  can  appear  in  the  sentence,  but 
only  a  name  for  the  word  (or  sign).  According  to  a  standard 
convention  we  construct  a  name  for  a  linguistic  expression  by 
placing  single  quotation  marks  around  it.  Our  text  adheres  to 
this  convention.   It  is  correct  to  write 

Chicago  is  a  populous  city. 
But  it  is  incorrect  to  write 

Chicago  is  tri-syllabic. 
To  express  what  is  intended  by  this  latter  sentence,  one  must 
write 

'Chicago'   is   tri-syllabic. 
Likewise,  it  is  incorrect  to  write 

x  =  5  is  an  equation. 
We  must,  instead,  formulate  our  intent  by 

lx  =  5'  is  an  equation. 


32     Godel's  Proof 

curs,  and  is  meta-zoology.  If  we  say  that  the  id  is 
mightier  than  the  ego,  we  are  making  noises  that  be- 
long to  orthodox  psychoanalysis;  but  if  we  criticize 
this  statement  as  meaningless  and  unprovable,  our 
criticism  belongs  to  meta-psychoanalysis.  And  so  in 
the  case  of  mathematics  and  meta-mathematics.  The 
formal  systems  that  mathematicians  construct  belong 
in  the  file  labeled  mathematics;  the  description,  dis- 
cussion, and  theorizing  about  the  systems  belong  in  the 
file  marked  meta-mathematics. 

The  importance  to  our  subject  of  recognizing  the 
distinction  between  mathematics  and  meta-mathemat- 
ics cannot  be  overemphasized.  Failure  to  respect  it 
has  produced  paradoxes  and  confusion.  Recognition 
of  its  significance  has  made  it  possible  to  exhibit  in  a 
clear  light  the  logical  structure  of  mathematical  rea- 
soning. The  merit  of  the  distinction  is  that  it  entails  a 
careful  codification  of  the  various  signs  that  go  into  the 
making  of  a  formal  calculus,  free  of  concealed  assump- 
tions and  irrelevant  associations  of  meaning.  Further- 
more, it  requires  exact  definitions  of  the  operations 
and  logical  rules  of  mathematical  construction  and 
deduction,  many  of  which  mathematicians  had  applied 
without  being  explicitly  aware  of  what  they  were  us- 
ing. 

Hilbert  saw  to  the  heart  of  the  matter,  and  it  was 
upon  the  distinction  between  a  formal  calculus  and  its 
description  that  he  based  his  attempt  to  build  abso- 
lute proofs  of  consistency.  Specifically,  he  sought  to 
develop  a  method  that  would  yield  demonstrations  of 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency    33 

consistency  as  much  beyond  genuine  logical  doubt  as 
the  use  of  finite  models  for  establishing  the  consistency 
of  certain  sets  of  postulates — by  an  analysis  of  a  finite 
number  of  structural  features  of  expressions  in  com- 
pletely formalized  calculi.  The  analysis  consists  in 
noting  the  various  types  of  signs  that  occur  in  a  calcu- 
lus, indicating  how  to  combine  them  into  formulas, 
prescribing  how  formulas  can  be  obtained  from  other 
formulas,  and  determining  whether  formulas  of  a 
given  kind  are  derivable  from  others  through  explic- 
itly stated  rules  of  operation.  Hilbert  believed  it 
might  be  possible  to  exhibit  every  mathematical  calcu- 
lus as  a  sort  of  geometrical  pattern  of  formulas,  in 
which  the  formulas  stand  to  each  other  in  a  finite  num- 
ber of  structural  relations.  He  therefore  hoped  to 
show,  by  exhaustively  examining  these  structural  prop- 
erties of  expressions  within  a  system,  that  formally 
contradictory  formulas  cannot  be  obtained  from  the 
axioms  of  given  calculi.  An  essential  requirement  of 
Hilbert's  program  in  its  original  conception  was  that 
demonstrations  of  consistency  involve  only  such  pro- 
cedures as  make  no  reference  either  to  an  infinite  num- 
ber of  structural  properties  of  formulas  or  to  an  in- 
finite number  of  operations  with  formulas.  Such  pro- 
cedures are  called  finitistic;  and  a  proof  of  consist- 
ency conforming  to  this  requirement  is  called  abso- 
lute. An  absolute  proof  achieves  its  objectives  by 
using  a  minimum  of  principles  of  inference,  and  does 
not  assume  the  consistency  of  some  other  set  of  axioms. 
An  absolute  proof  of  the  consistency  of  arithmetic,  if 


34     Godel's  Proof 

one  could  be  constructed,  would  therefore  show  by  a 
finitistic  meta-mathematical  procedure  that  two  con- 
tradictory formulas,  such  as  '0  =  0'  and  its  formal 
negation  '~  (0  =  0)' — where  the  sign  l~  means  'not' 
— cannot  both  be  derived  by  stated  rules  of  inference 
from  the  axioms  (or  initial  formulas).4 

It  may  be  useful,  by  way  of  illustration,  to  compare 
meta-mathematics  as  a  theory  of  proof  with  the  theory 
of  chess.  Chess  is  played  with  32  pieces  of  specified 
design  on  a  square  board  containing  64  square  sub- 
divisions, where  the  pieces  may  be  moved  in  accord- 
ance with  fixed  rules.  The  game  can  obviously  be 
played  without  assigning  any  ' 'interpretation  to  the 
pieces  or  to  their  various  positions  on  the  board,  al- 
though such  an  interpretation  could  be  supplied  if 
desired.  For  example,  we  could  stipulate  that  a  given 
pawn  is  to  represent  a  certain  regiment  in  an  army, 
that  a  given  square  is  to  stand  for  a  certain  geographi- 
cal region,  and  so  on.  But  such  stipulations  (or  in- 
terpretations) are  not  customary;  and  neither  the 
pieces,  nor  the  squares,  nor  the  positions  of  the  pieces 
on  the  board  signify  anything  outside  the  game.  In 
this  sense,  the  pieces  and  their  configurations  on  the 
board  are  meaningless.  Thus  the  game  is  analogous 


4  Hilbert  did  not  give  an  altogether  precise  account  of  just 
what  meta-mathematical  procedures  are  to  count  as  finitistic. 
In  the  original  version  of  his  program  the  requirements  for 
an  absolute  proof  of  consistency  were  more  stringent  than  in 
the  subsequent  explanations  of  the  program  by  members  of 
his  school. 


Absolute  Proofs  of  Consistency     35 

to  a  formalized  mathematical  calculus.  The  pieces  and 
the  squares  of  the  board  correspond  to  the  elementary 
signs  of  the  calculus;  the  legal  positions  of  pieces  on 
the  board,  to  the  formulas  of  the  calculus;  the  initial 
positions  of  pieces  on  the  board,  to  the  axioms  or  initial 
formulas  of  the  calculus;  the  subsequent  positions  of 
pieces  on  the  board,  to  formulas  derived  from  the 
axioms  (i.e.,  to  the  theorems);  and  the  rules  of  the 
game,  to  the  rules  of  inference  (or  derivation)  for  the 
calculus.  The  parallelism  continues.  Although  con- 
figurations of  pieces  on  the  board,  like  the  formulas  of 
the  calculus,  are  meaningless,  statements  about  these 
configurations,  like  meta-mathematical  statements 
about  formulas,  are  quite  meaningful.  A  meta-chess 
statement  may  assert  that  there  are  twenty  possible 
opening  moves  for  White,  or  that,  given  a  certain  con- 
figuration of  pieces  on  the  board  with  White  to  move, 
Black  is  mate  in  three  moves.  Moreover,  general 
meta-chess  theorems  can  be  established  whose  proof 
involves  only  a  finite  number  of  permissible  configura- 
tions on  the  board.  The  meta-chess  theorem  about 
the  number  of  possible  opening  moves  for  White  can 
be  established  in  this  way;  and  so  can  the  meta-chess 
theorem  that  if  White  has  only  two  Knights  and  the 
King,  and  Black  only  his  King,  it  is  impossible  for 
White  to  force  a  mate  against  Black.  These  and  other 
meta-chess  theorems  can,  in  other  words,  be  proved 
by  finitistic  methods  of  reasoning,  that  is,  by  examin- 
ing in  turn  each  of  a  finite  number  of  configurations 
that  can  occur  under  stated  conditions.    The  aim  of 


36     GodeVs  Proof 

Hilbert's  theory  of  proof,  similarly,  was  to  demonstrate 
by  such  finitistic  methods  the  impossibility  of  deriv- 
ing certain  contradictory  formulas  in  a  given  mathe- 
matical calculus. 


IV 


The  Systematic  Codification  of  Formal  Logic 

There  are  two  more  bridges  to  cross  before  entering 
upon  Godel's  proof  itself.  We  must  indicate  how  and 
why  Whitehead  and  Russell's  Principia  Mathematica 
came  into  being;  and  we  must  give  a  short  illustration 
of  the  formalization  of  a  deductive  system — we  shall 
take  a  fragment  of  Principia — and  explain  how  its 
absolute  consistency  can  be  established. 

Ordinarily,  even  when  mathematical  proofs  con- 
form to  accepted  standards  of  professional  rigor,  they 
suffer  from  an  important  omission.  They  embody 
principles  (or  rules)  of  inference  not  explicitly  formu- 
lated, of  which  mathematicians  are  frequently  un- 
aware. Take  Euclid's  proof  that  there  is  no  greatest 
prime  number  (a  number  is  prime  if  it  is  divisible 
without  remainder  by  no  number  other  than  1  and 
the  number  itself).  The  argument,  cast  in  the  form  of 
a  reductio  ad  absurdum,  runs  as  follows 

Suppose,  in  contradiction  to  what  the  proof  seeks  to 
establish,  that  there  is  a  greatest  prime  number.  We 
designate  it  by  V.  Then 

37 


38     Godel's  Proof 

1 .  x  is  the  greatest  prime 

2.  Form  the  product  of  all  primes  less  than 
or  equal  to  x,  and  add  i  to  the  product.  This 
yields  a  new  number  y,  where  y  = 

(2X3X5X7X...X)  +  i 

3.  If  y  is  itself  a  prime,  then  x  is  not  the 
greatest  prime,  for  y  is  obviously  greater 
than  x 

4.  If  y  is  composite  (i.e.,  not  a  prime),  then 
again  x  is  not  the  greatest  prime.  For  if  y 
is  composite,  it  must  have  a  prime  divisor  z; 
and  z  must  be  different  from  each  of  the 
prime  numbers  2,  3,  5,  7,  ... ,  x}  smaller  than 
or  equal  to  x;  hence  z  must  be  a  prime  greater 
than  x 

5.  But  y  is  either  prime  or  composite 

6.  Hence  x  is  not  the  greatest  prime 

7.  There  is  no  greatest  prime 

We  have  stated  only  the  main  links  of  the  proof.  It 
can  be  shown,  however,  that  in  forging  the  complete 
chain  a  fairly  large  number  of  tacitly  accepted  rules  of 
inference,  as  well  as  theorems  of  logic,  are  essential. 
Some  of  these  belong  to  the  most  elementary  part  of 
formal  logic,  others  to  more  advanced  branches;  for 
example,  rules  and  theorems  are  incorporated  that 
belong  to  the  theory  of  quantification.  This  deals 
with  relations  between  statements  containing  such 
quantifying  particles  as  'all',  'some',  and  their  syno- 
nyms.   We  shall  exhibit  one  elementary  theorem  of 


The  Systematic  Codification  of  Formal  Logic    39 

logic  and  one  rule  of  inference,  each  of  which  is  a 
necessary  but  silent  partner  in  the  demonstration. 

Look  at  line  5  of  the  proof.  Where  does  it  come 
from  The  answer  is,  from  the  logical  theorem  (or 
necessary  truth)  'Either  p  or  non-p',  where  'p'  is  called 
a  sentential  variable.  But  how  do  we  get  line  5  from 
this  theorem  The  answer  is,  by  using  the  rule  of  in- 
ference known  as  the  Rule  of  Substitution  for  Sen- 
tential Variables,  according  to  which  a  statement  can 
be  derived  from  another  containing  such  variables  by 
substituting  any  statement  (in  this  case,  'y  is  prime') 
for  each  occurrence  of  a  distinct  variable  (in  this  case, 
the  variable  'p').  The  use  of  these  rules  and  logical 
theorems  is,  as  we  have  said,  frequently  an  all  but  un- 
conscious action.  And  the  analysis  that  exposes  them, 
even  in  such  relatively  simple  proofs  as  Euclid's,  de- 
pends upon  advances  in  logical  theory  made  only 
within  the  past  one  hundred  years.5  Like  Moliere's 
M.  Jourdain,  who  spoke  prose  all  his  life  without 
knowing  it,  mathematicians  have  been  reasoning  for 
at  least  two  millennia  without  being  aware  of  all  the 
principles  underlying  what  they  were  doing.  The  real 
nature  of  the  tools  of  their  craft  has  become  evident 
only  within  recent  times. 

For  almost  two  thousand  years  Aristotle's  codifica- 
tion of  valid  forms  of  deduction  was  widely  regarded 
as  complete  and  as  incapable  of  essential  improvement. 


5  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  rules  of  inference  and 
logical  theorems  needed  for  obtaining  lines  6  and  7  of  the 
above  proof,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix,  no.  2- 


40     GodeVs  Proof 

As  late  as  1787,  the  German  philosopher  Immanuel 
Kant  was  able  to  say  that  since  Aristotle  formal  logic 
has  not  been  able  to  advance  a  single  step,  and  is  to  all 
appearances  a  closed  and  completed  body  of  doctrine. 
The  fact  is  that  the  traditional  logic  is  seriously  in- 
complete, and  even  fails  to  give  an  account  of  many 
principles  of  inference  employed  in  quite  elementary 
mathematical  reasoning.6  A  renaissance  of  logical 
studies  in  modern  times  began  with  the  publication  in 
1847  °f  George  Boole's  The  Mathematical  Analysis  of 
Logic.  The  primary  concern  of  Boole  and  his  immedi- 
ate successors  was  to  develop  an  algebra  of  logic  which 
would  provide  a  precise  notation  for  handling  more 
general  and  more  varied  types  of  deduction  than  were 
covered  by  traditional  logical  principles.  Suppose  it 
is  found  that  in  a  certain  school  those  who  graduate 
with  honors  are  made  up  exactly  of  boys  majoring  in 
mathematics  and  girls  not  majoring  in  this  subject. 
How  is  the  class  of  mathematics  majors  made  up,  in 
terms  of  the  other  classes  of  students  mentioned  The 
answer  is  not  readily  forthcoming  if  one  uses  only  the 
apparatus  of  traditional  logic.  But  with  the  help  of 
Boolean  algebra  it  can  easily  be  shown  that  the  class 
of  mathematics  majors  consists  exactly  of  boys  gradu- 
ating with  honors  and  girls  not  graduating  with 
honors. 


6  For  example,  of  the  principles  involved  in  the  inference 
5  is  greater  than  3;  therefore,  the  square  of  5  is  greater  than 
the  square  of  3. 


The  Systematic  Codification  of  Formal  Logic    41 
All  gentlemen  are  polite. 
No  bankers  are  polite. 
No  gentlemen  are  bankers. 


sc 

P 

b  c 

P 

•••  gc 

b 

gp  = 

=  0 

bp- 

=  0 

gb  =  0 

Symbolic  logic  was  invented  in  the  middle  of  the 
19th  century  by  the  English  mathematician  George 
Boole.  In  this  illustration  a  syllogism  is  translated 
into  his  notation  in  two  different  ways.  In  the 
upper  group  of  formulas,  the  symbol  'C'  means 
is  contained  in.  Thus  'g  C  p'  says  that  the  class 
of  gentlemen  is  included  in  the  class  of  polite  per- 
sons. In  the  lower  group  of  formulas  two  letters 
together  mean  the  class  of  things  having  both  char- 
acteristics. For  example,  'bp'  means  the  class  of  in- 
dividuals who  are  bankers  and  polite;  and  the  equa- 
tion 'bp  =  0'  says  that  this  class  has  no  members. 
A  line  above  a  letter  means  not.  ('p',  for  example, 
means  impolite.) 

Table  1 


Another  line  of  inquiry,  closely  related  to  the  work 
of  nineteenth-century  mathematicians  on  the  founda- 


42     Godel's  Proof 

tions  of  analysis,  became  associated  with  the  Boolean 
program.  This  new  development  sought  to  exhibit 
pure  mathematics  as  a  chapter  of  formal  logic;  and  it 
received  its  classical  embodiment  in  the  Principia 
Mathematica  of  Whitehead  and  Russell  in  1910. 
Mathematicians  of  the  nineteenth  century  succeeded 
in  arithmetizing  algebra  and  what  used  to  be  called 
the  infinitesimal  calculus  by  showing  that  the  vari- 
ous notions  employed  in  mathematical  analysis  are 
definable  exclusively  in  arithmetical  terms  (i.e.,  in 
terms  of  the  integers  and  the  arithmetical  operations 
upon  them).  For  example,  instead  of  accepting  the 
imaginary  number  V—1  as  a  somewhat  mysterious 
entity,  it  came  to  be  defined  as  an  ordered  pair  of 
integers  (0,  1)  upon  which  certain  operations  of  ad- 
dition and  multiplication  are  performed.  Simi- 
larly, the  irrational  number  z  was  defined  as  a  cer- 
tain class  of  rational  numbers — namely,  the  class  of 
rationals  whose  square  is  less  than  2.  What  Russell 
(and,  before  him,  the  German  mathematician  Gottlob 
Frege)  sought  to  show  was  that  all  arithmetical  notions 
can  be  defined  in  purely  logical  ideas,  and  that  all  the 
axioms  of  arithmetic  can  be  deduced  from  a  small 
number  of  basic  propositions  certifiable  as  purely  logi- 
cal truths. 

To  illustrate  the  notion  of  class  belongs  to  general 
logic.  Two  classes  are  defined  as  similar  if  there  is  a 
one-to-one  correspondence  between  their  members, 
the  notion  of  such  a  correspondence  being  explicable 
in  terms  of  other  logical  ideas.  A  class  that  has  a  single 


The  Systematic  Codification  of  Formal  Logic    43 

member  is  said  to  be  a  unit  class  (e.g.,  the  class  of 
satellites  of  the  planet  Earth);  and  the  cardinal  num- 
ber 1  can  be  defined  as  the  class  of  all  classes  similar  to 
a  unit  class.  Analogous  definitions  can  be  given  of  the 
other  cardinal  numbers;  and  the  various  arithmetical 
operations,  such  as  addition  and  multiplication,  can  be 
defined  in  the  notions  of  formal  logic.  An  arithmetical 
statement,  e.g.,  i  +  1  =  2',  can  then  be  exhibited  as 
a  condensed  transcription  of  a  statement  containing 
only  expressions  belonging  to  general  logic;  and  such 
purely  logical  statements  can  be  shown  to  be  deducible 
from  certain  logical  axioms. 

Principia  Mathematica  thus  appeared  to  advance 
the  final  solution  of  the  problem  of  consistency  of 
mathematical  systems,  and  of  arithmetic  in  particular, 
by  reducing  the  problem  to  that  of  the  consistency  of 
formal  logic  itself.  For,  if  the  axioms  of  arithmetic  are 
simply  transcriptions  of  theorems  in  logic,  the  question 
whether  the  axioms  are  consistent  is  equivalent  to  the 
question  whether  the  fundamental  axioms  of  logic  are 
consistent. 

The  Frege-Russell  thesis  that  mathematics  is  only  a 
chapter  of  logic  has,  for  various  reasons  of  detail,  not 
won  universal  acceptance  from  mathematicians.  More- 
over, as  we  have  noted,  the  antinomies  of  the  Can- 
torian  theory  of  transfinite  numbers  can  be  duplicated 
within  logic  itself,  unless  special  precautions  are  taken 
to  prevent  this  outcome.  But  are  the  measures  adopted 
in  Principia  Mathematica  to  outflank  the  antinomies 
adequate  to  exclude  all  forms  of  self-contradictory  con- 


44    Godel's  Proof 

structions  This  cannot  be  asserted  as  a  matter  of 
course.  Therefore  the  Frege-Russell  reduction  of 
arithmetic  to  logic  does  not  provide  a  final  answer  to 
the  consistency  problem;  indeed,  the  problem  simply 
emerges  in  a  more  general  form.  But,  irrespective  of 
the  validity  of  the  Frege-Russell  thesis,  two  features  of 
Principia  have  proved  of  inestimable  value  for  the 
further  study  of  the  consistency  question.  Principia 
provides  a  remarkably  comprehensive  system  of  nota- 
tion, with  the  help  of  which  all  statements  of  pure 
mathematics  (and  of  arithmetic  in  particular)  can  be 
codified  in  a  standard  manner;  and  it  makes  explicit 
most  of  the  rules  of  formal  inference  used  in  mathe- 
matical demonstrations  (eventually,  these  rules  were 
made  more  precise  and  complete).  Principia,  in  sum, 
created  the  essential  instrument  for  investigating  the 
entire  system  of  arithmetic  as  an  uninterpreted  calcu- 
lus— that  is,  as  a  system  of  meaningless  marks,  whose 
formulas  (or  strings)  are  combined  and  transformed 
in  accordance  with  stated  rules  of  operation. 


V 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of 
Consistency 

We  must  now  attempt  the  second  task  mentioned  at 
the  outset  of  the  preceding  section,  and  familiarize 
ourselves  with  an  important,  though  easily  under- 
standable, example  of  an  absolute  proof  of  consist- 
ency. By  mastering  the  proof,  the  reader  will  be  in  a 
better  position  to  appreciate  the  significance  of  Godel's 
paper  of  1931. 

We  shall  outline  how  a  small  portion  of  Principia, 
the  elementary  logic  of  propositions,  can  be  formalized. 
This  entails  the  conversion  of  the  fragmentary  system 
into  a  calculus  of  uninterpreted  signs.  We  shall  then 
develop  an  absolute  proof  of  consistency. 

The  formalization  proceeds  in  four  steps.  First,  § 
complete  catalogue  is  prepared  of  the  signs  to  be  used 
in  the  calculus.  These  are  its  vocabulary.  Second,  the 
Formation  Rules  are  laid  down.  They  declare 
which  of  the  combinations  of  the  signs  in  the  vocabu- 
lary are  acceptable  as  formulas  (in  effect,  as  sen- 
tences).  The  rules  may  be  viewed  as  constituting  the 

45 


46     Godel's  Proof 

grammar  of  the  system.  Third,  the  ' 'Transformation 
Rules  are  stated.  They  describe  the  precise  structure 
of  formulas  from  which  other  formulas  of  given  struc- 
ture are  derivable.  These  rules  are,  in  effect,  the  rules 
of  inference.  Finally,  certain  formulas  are  selected  as 
axioms  (or  as  primitive  formulas).  They  serve  as 
foundation  for  the  entire  system.  We  shall  use  the 
phrase  theorem  of  the  system  to  denote  any  formula 
that  can  be  derived  from  the  axioms  by  successively 
applying  the  Transformation  Rules.  By  a  formal 
proof  (or  demonstration)  we  shall  mean  a  finite 
sequence  of  formulas,  each  of  which  either  is  an  axiom 
or  can  be  derived  from  preceding  formulas  in  the  se- 
quence by  the  Transformation  Rules.7 

For  the  logic  of  propositions  (often  called  the  sen- 
tential calculus)  the  vocabulary  (or  list  of  ele- 
mentary signs)  is  extremely  simple.  It  consists  of  vari- 
ables and  constant  signs.  The  variables  may  have  sen- 
tences substituted  for  them  and  are  therefore  called 
sentential  variables.   They  are  the  letters 

y,  y,  v,  etc. 

The  constant  signs  are  either  sentential  connectives 
or  signs  of  punctuation.  The  sentential  connectives 
are 

'^'  which  is  short  for  'not' 

(and  is  called  the  tilde), 


7  It  immediately  follows   that  axioms  are   to  be  counted 
among  the  theorems. 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of  Consistency    47 

'V     which  is  short  for  'or', 

'3'    which  is  short  for  'if  .  .  .  then  .  .  .',  and 

'•'     which  is  short  for  'and. 

The  signs  of  punctuation  are  the  left-  and  right-hand 
round  parentheses,  '('  and  ')',  respectively. 

The  Formation  Rules  are  so  designed  that  combina- 
tions of  the  elementary  signs,  which  would  normally 
have  the  form  of  sentences,  are  called  formulas.  Also, 
each  sentential  variable  counts  as  a  formula.  More- 
over, if  the  letter  'S'  stands  for  a  formula,  its  formal 
negation,  namely,  ~  (S),  is  also  a  formula.  Similarly,  if 
Si  and  S2  are  formulas,  so  are  (Si)  V  (S2),  (Si)  3  (S2),  and 
(Si)  •  (S2).  Each  of  the  following  is  a  formula  'p 
'~(PY  '(P)3{q)',  '(() VW)  D  ()'•  But  neither 
'(P)(~  (#))'  nor  '((P)  D  (#))  v'  s  a  formula  not  the 
first,  because,  while  '()'  and  '(~  (q)Y  are  both  for- 
mulas, no  sentential  connective  occurs  between  them; 
and  not  the  second,  because  the  connective  'V  is  not,  as 
the  Rules  require,  flanked  on  both  left  and  right  by  a 
formula.8 

Two  Transformation  Rules  are  adopted.  One  of 
them,  the  Rule  of  Substitution  (for  sentential  varia- 
bles), says  that  from  a  formula  containing  sentential 
Variables  it  is  always  permissible  to  derive  another  for- 
mula by  uniformly  substituting  formulas  for  the  varia- 


8  Where  there  is  no  possibility  of  confusion,  punctuation 
marks  (i.e.,  parentheses)  can  be  dropped.  Thus,  instead  of 
writing  '^  (p)'  it  is  sufficient  to  write  ~  p';  and  instead  of 

HP)  =  (lY  simpty  'P  =  I'- 


48     Godel's  Proof 

bles.  It  is  understood  that,  when  substitutions  are 
made  for  a  variable  in  a  formula,  the  same  substitution 
must  be  made  for  each  occurrence  of  the  variable.  For 
example,  on  the  assumption  that  'p  D  p'  has  already 
been  established,  we  can  substitute  for  the  variable  'p' 
the  formula  'q  to  get  'q  3  q';  or  we  can  substitute  the 
formula  'p  V  q  to  get  '(p  V  q)  D  (p  V  q)  Or,  if  we  sub- 
stitute actual  English  sentences  for  'p',  we  can  obtain 
each  of  the  following  from  'p  D  p'  'Frogs  are  noisy  3 
Frogs  are  noisy';  '(Bats  are  blind  V  Bats  eat  mice)  D 
(Bats  are  blind  V  Bats  eat  mice)'.9  The  second  Trans- 
formation Rule  is  the  Rule  of  Detachment  (or  Modus 
Ponens).  This  rule  says  that  from  two  formulas  hav- 
ing the  form  Si  and  Si  D  S2  it  is  always  permissible  to 
derive  the  formula  S2.  For  example,  from  the  two  for- 
mulas 'pV  ~  p'  and  '(  V  ~  p)  D  (p  D  p)  we  can  de- 
rive 'p  D  p 

Finally,  the  axioms  of  the  calculus  (essentially  those 
of  Principia)  are  the  following  four  formulas 

1.  (p  V  p)  D  p  1.  If  (either  Henry  VIII  was 

or,  in  ordinary  Eng-  a  boor  or  Henry  VIII  was 

lish,  if  either  p  or  p,  a  boor)  then  Henry  VIII 

then  p  was  a  boor 


9  On  the  other  hand,  suppose  the  formula  '(p  D  q) 
D  (-  q  D'  ~  p)'  has  already  been  established,  and  we  decide  to 
substitute  V  for  the  variable  p  and  lp  V  r'  for  the  variable 
(q  We  cannot,  by  this  substitution,  obtain  the  formula 
r  D  (p  V  r))  D  (~  q  D  ~  r)  because  we  have  failed  to  make 
the  same  substitution  for  each  occurrence  of  the  variable  lq'. 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of  Consistency    49 

2.  p  D  (pV  q)  2.  If  psychoanalysis  is  fash- 
that  is,  if  p,  then  ionable,  then  (either  psy- 
either  p  or  q  choanalysis  is  fashionable 

or  headache  powders  are 
sold  cheap) 

3.  (pVq)D(qVp)  3.  If  (either  Immanuel  Kant 
that  is,  if  either  p  or  was  punctual  or  Holly- 
q,  then  either  q  or  p  wood     is     sinful),     then 

(either  Hollywood  is  sin- 
ful or  Immanuel  Kant 
was  punctual) 

4.  (p  D  q)   D   ((r  V  p)     4.  If  (if  ducks  waddle  then 

D  (r  V  q))  5    is    a   prime)    then    (if 

that  is,  if  (if  p  then  (either  Churchill  drinks 

q)  then  (if  (either  r  brandy  or  ducks  waddle) 

or  p)  then  (either  r  then     (either     Churchill 

or  q))  drinks  brandy  or  5  is  a 

prime)) 
In  the  left-hand  column  we  have  stated  the  axioms, 
with  a  translation  for  each.  In  the  right-hand  column 
we  have  given  an  example  for  each  axiom.  The  clumsi- 
ness of  the  translations,  especially  in  the  case  of  the 
final  axiom,  will  perhaps  help  the  reader  to  realize 
the  advantages  of  using  a  special  symbolism  in  formal 
logic.  It  is  also  important  to  observe  that  the  non- 
sensical illustrations  used  as  substitution  instances  for 
the  axioms  and  the  fact  that  the  consequents  bear  no 
meaningful  relation  to  the  antecedents  in  the  condi- 

The    correct    substitution    yields    '(r  D  (pl  r))  3  (^  (p  V  r) 
D  ^  r) 


50     GodeVs  Proof 

tional  sentences  in  no  way  affect  the  validity  of  the 
logical  connections  asserted  in  the  examples. 

Each  of  these  axioms  may  seem  obvious  and 
trivial.  Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to  derive  from 
them  with  the  help  of  the  stated  Transformation  Rules 
an  indefinitely  large  class  of  theorems  which  are  far 
from  obvious  or  trivial.    For  example,   the  formula 

((P  Dq)D  ((r  DS)D  t))  D  ((11  D  ((r  D  s)  D  t)) 

D  ((p  D  u)  D(sD  t))Y 

can  be  derived  as  a  theorem.  We  are,  however,  not 
interested  for  the  moment  in  deriving  theorems  from 
the  axioms.  Our  aim  is  to  show  that  this  set  of  axioms 
is  not  contradictory,  that  is,  to  prove  absolutely  that 
it  is  impossible  by  using  the  Transformation  Rules 
to  derive  from  the  axioms  a  formula  S  together  with  its 
formal  negation  ^  S. 

Now,  it  happens  that  'p  D  (~  p  D  q)y  (in  words 
'if  p,  then  if  not-  then  q)  is  a  theorem  in  the  calcu- 
lus. (We  shall  accept  this  as  a  fact,  without  exhibiting 
the  derivation.)  Suppose,  then,  that  some  formula  S 
as  well  as  its  contradictory  ~  S  were  deducible  from 
the  axioms.  By  substituting  S  for  the  variable  ''  in  the 
theorem  (as  permitted  by  the  Rule  of  Substitution), 
and  applying  the  Rule  of  Detachment  twice,  the  for- 
mula 'q'  would  be  deducible.10  But,  if  the  formula  con- 

10  By  substituting  S  for  (p'  we  first  obtain  S  D  (^  S  D  q). 
From  this,  together  with  S,  which  is  assumed  to  be  demonstra- 
ble, we  obtain  by  the  Detachment  Rule  ^SDf  Finally, 
since  ^  S  is  also  assumed  to  be  demonstrable,  using  the  De- 
tachment Rule  once  more,  we  get  q. 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of  Consistency    51 

sisting  of  the  variable  'q'  is  demonstrable,  it  follows  at 
once  that  by  substituting  any  formula  whatsoever  for 
'q',  any  formula  whatsoever  is  deducible  from  the 
axioms.  It  is  thus  clear  that,  if  both  some  formula  S 
and  its  contradictory  ^  S  were  deducible  from  the 
axioms,  every  formula  would  be  deducible.  In  short, 
if  the  calculus  is  not  consistent,  every  formula  is  a 
theorem — which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  from  a  con- 
tradictory set  of  axioms  any  formula  can  be  derived. 
But  this  has  a  converse  namely,  if  not  every  formula 
is  a  theorem  (i.e.,  if  there  is  at  least  one  formula  that  is 
not  derivable  from  the  axioms),  then  the  calculus  is 
consistent.  The  task,  therefore,  is  to  show  that  there  is 
at  least  one  formula  that  cannot  be  derived  from  the 
axioms. 

The  way  this  is  done  is  to  employ  meta-mathematical 
reasoning  upon  the  system  before  us.  The  actual  pro- 
cedure is  elegant.  It  consists  in  finding  a  characteristic 
or  structural  property  of  formulas  which  satisfies  the 
three  following  conditions.  (1)  The  property  must  be 
common  to  all  four  axioms.  (One  such  property  is  that 
of  containing  not  more  than  25  elementary  signs;  how- 
ever, this  property  does  not  satisfy  the  next  condition.) 
(2)  The  property  must  be  hereditary  under  the 
Transformation  Rules — that  is,  if  all  the  axioms  have 
the  property,  any  formula  properly  derived  from  them 
by  the  Transformation  Rules  must  also  have  it.  Since 
any  formula  so  derived  is  by  definition  a  theorem,  this 
condition  in  essence  stipulates  that  every  theorem  must 
have  the  property.  (3)  The  property  must  not  belong 


52     Godel's  Proof 

to  every  formula  that  can  be  constructed  in  accordance 
with  the  Formation  Rules  of  the  system — that  is,  we 
must  seek  to  exhibit  at  least  one  formula  that  does  not 
have  the  property.  If  we  succeed  in  this  threefold  task, 
we  shall  have  an  absolute  proof  of  consistency.  The 
reasoning  runs  something  like  this  the  hereditary 
property  is  transmitted  from  the  axioms  to  all  theo- 
rems; but  if  an  array  of  signs  can  be  found  that  con- 
forms to  the  requirements  of  being  a  formula  in  the 
system  and  that,  nevertheless,  does  not  possess  the 
specified  hereditary  property,  this  formula  cannot  be  a 
theorem.  (To  put  the  matter  in  another  way,  if  a  sus- 
pected offspring  (formula)  lacks  an  invariably  in- 
herited trait  of  the  forebears  (axioms),  it  cannot  in  fact 
be  their  descendant  (theorem)).  But,  if  a  formula  is 
discovered  that  is  not  a  theorem,  we  have  established 
the  consistency  of  the  system;  for,  as  we  noted  a  mo- 
ment ago,  if  the  system  were  not  consistent,  every  for- 
mula could  be  derived  from  the  axioms  (i.e.,  every  for- 
mula would  be  a  theorem).  In  short,  the  exhibition  of 
a  single  formula  without  the  hereditary  property  does 
the  trick. 

Let  us  identify  a  property  of  the  required  kind.  The 
one  we  choose  is  the  property  of  being  a  tautology. 
In  common  parlance,  an  utterance  is  usually  said  to  be 
tautologous  if  it  contains  a  redundancy  and  says  the 
same  thing  twice  over  in  different  words — e.g.,  'John 
is  the  father  of  Charles  and  Charles  is  a  son  of  John 
In  logic,  however,  a  tautology  is  defined  as  a  statement 
that  excludes  no  logical  possibilities — e.g.,  'Either  it 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of  Consistency     53 

is  raining  or  it  is  not  raining'.  Another  way  of  putting 
this  is  to  say  that  a  tautology  is  true  in  all  possible 
worlds.  No  one  will  doubt  that,  irrespective  of  the 
actual  state  of  the  weather  (i.e.,  regardless  of  whether 
the  statement  that  it  is  raining  is  true  or  false),  the 
statement  'Either  it  is  raining  or  it  is  not  raining  is 
necessarily  true. 

We  employ  this  notion  to  define  a  tautology  in  our 
system.  Notice,  first,  that  every  formula  is  constructed 
of  elementary  constituents  '',  'q ',  V,  etc.  A  formula  is 
a  tautology  if  it  is  invariably  true,  regardless  of 
whether  its  elementary  constituents  are  true  or  false. 
Thus,  in  the  first  axiom  '(pV-p)  3  p  the  only  ele- 
mentary constituent  is  'p';  but  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  'p'  is  assumed  to  be  true  or  is  assumed  to  be 
false — the  first  axiom  is  true  in  either  case.  This  may 
be  made  more  evident  if  we  substitute  for  'p'  the  state- 
ment 'Mt.  Rainier  is  20,000  feet  high';  we  then  obtain 
as  an  instance  of  the  first  axiom  the  statement  'If  either 
M t.  Rainier  is  20,000  feet  high  or  Mt.  Rainier  is  20,000 
feet  high,  then  Mt.  Rainier  is  20,000  feet  high'.  The 
reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  this  long 
statement  to  be  true,  even  if  he  should  not  happen  to 
know  whether  the  constituent  statement  'Mt.  Rainier 
is  20,000  feet  high'  is  true.  Obviously,  then,  the  first 
axiom  is  a  tautology — true  in  all  possible  worlds.  It 
can  easily  be  shown  that  each  of  the  other  axioms  is 
also  a  tautology. 

Next,  it  is  possible  to  prove  that  the  property  of 
being  a  tautology  is  hereditary  under  the  Transforma- 


54     Godel's  Proof 

tion  Rules,  though  we  shall  not  turn  aside  to  give  the 
demonstration.  (See  Appendix,  no.  3.)  It  follows  that 
every  formula  properly  derived  from  the  axioms  (i.e., 
every  theorem)  must  be  a  tautology. 

It  has  now  been  shown  that  the  property  of  being 
tautologous  satisfies  two  of  the  three  conditions  men- 
tioned earlier,  and  we  are  ready  for  the  third  step.  We 
must  look  for  a  formula  that  belongs  to  the  system 
(i.e.,  is  constructed  out  of  the  signs  mentioned  in 
the  vocabulary  in  accordance  with  the  Formation 
Rules),  yet,  because  it  does  not  possess  the  property  of 
being  a  tautology,  cannot  be  a  theorem  (i.e.,  cannot  be 
derived  from  the  axioms).  We  do  not  have  to  look  very 
hard;  it  is  easy  to  exhibit  such  a  formula.  For  example, 
'pV  q  fits  the  requirements.  It  purports  to  be  a  gosling 
but  is  in  fact  a  duckling;  it  does  not  belong  to  the  fam- 
ily it  is  a  formula,  but  it  is  not  a  theorem.  Clearly,  it  is 
not  a  tautology.  Any  substitution  instance  (or  in- 
terpretation) shows  this  at  once.  We  can  obtain  by 
substitution  for  the  variables  in  'pVq'  the  statement 
'Napoleon  died  of  cancer  or  Bismarck  enjoyed  a  cup  of 
coffee'.  This  is  not  a  truth  of  logic,  because  it  would  be 
false  if  both  of  the  two  clauses  occurring  in  it  were 
false;  and,  even  if  it  is  a  true  statement,  it  is  not  true 
irrespective  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  its  constituent 
statements.  (See  Appendix,  no.  3.) 

We  have  achieved  our  goal.  We  have  found  at  least 
one  formula  that  is  not  a  theorem.  Such  a  formula 
could  not  occur  if  the  axioms  were  contradictory.  Con- 
sequently, it  is  not  possible  to  derive  from  the  axioms 


An  Example  of  a  Successful  Absolute  Proof  of  Consistency     55 

of  the  sentential  calculus  both  a  formula  and  its  nega- 
tion. In  short,  we  have  exhibited  an  absolute  proof  of 
the  consistency  of  the  system.11 

Before  leaving  the  sentential  calculus,  we  must  men- 
tion a  final  point.  Since  every  theorem  of  this  calculus 
is  a  tautology,  a  truth  of  logic,  it  is  natural  to  ask 
whether,  conversely,  every  logical  truth  expressible  in 
the  vocabulary  of  the  calculus  (i.e.,  every  tautology)  is 
also  a  theorem  (i.e.,  derivable  from  the  axioms).  The 
answer  is  yes,  though  the  proof  is  too  long  to  be  stated 
here.  The  point  we  are  concerned  with  making,  how- 
ever, does  not  depend  on  acquaintance  with  the  proof. 
The  point  is  that,  in  the  light  of  this  conclusion,  the 
axioms  are  sufficient  for  generating  all  tautologous 
formulas — all  logical  truths  expressible  in  the  system. 
Such  axioms  are  said  to  be  complete 

Now,  it  is  frequently  of  paramount  interest  to  de- 


11  The  reader  may  find  helpful  the  following  recapitulation 
of  the  sequence 

1.  Every  axiom  of  the  system  is  a  tautology. 

2.  Tautologousness  is  a  hereditary  property. 

3.  Every  formula  properly  derived  from  the  axioms    (i.e., 
every  theorem)  is  also  a  tautology. 

4.  Hence   any  formula   that  is   not   a   tautology   is  not   a 
theorem. 

5.  One  formula  has  been  found    (e.g.,  ep  V  q')    that  is  not 
a  tautology. 

6.  This  formula  is  therefore  not  a  theorem. 

7.  But,    if    the    axioms    were    inconsistent,    every   formula 
would  be  a  theorem. 

8.  Therefore  the  axioms  are  consistent. 


56     Godel's  Proof 

termine  whether  an  axiomatized  system  is  complete. 
Indeed,  a  powerful  motive  for  axiomatizing  various 
branches  of  mathematics  has  been  the  desire  to  estab- 
lish a  set  of  initial  assumptions  from  which  all  the  true 
statements  in  some  field  of  inquiry  are  deducible. 
When  Euclid  axiomatized  elementary  geometry,  he  ap- 
parently so  selected  his  axioms  as  to  make  it  possible  to 
derive  from  them  all  geometric  truths;  that  is,  those 
that  had  already  been  established,  as  well  as  any 
pthers  that  might  be  discovered  in  the  future.12  Until 
recently  it  was  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  that  a  com- 
plete set  of  axioms  for  any  given  branch  of  mathematics 
can  be  assembled.  In  particular,  mathematicians  be- 
lieved that  the  set  proposed  for  arithmetic  in  the  past 
was  in  fact  complete,  or,  at  worst,  could  be  made  com- 
plete simply  by  adding  a  finite  number  of  axioms  to  the 
original  list.  The  discovery  that  this  will  not  work  is 
one  of  Godel's  major  achievements. 


12  Euclid  showed  remarkable  insight  in  treating  his  famous 
parallel  axiom  as  an  assumption  logically  independent  of  his 
other  axioms.  For,  as  was  subsequently  proved,  this  axiom 
cannot  be  derived  from  his  remaining  assumptions,  so  that 
without  it  the  set  of  axioms  is  incomplete. 


VI 


The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics 

The  sentential  calculus  is  an  example  of  a  mathemat- 
ical system  for  which  the  objectives  of  Hilbert's  theory 
of  proof  are  fully  realized.  To  be  sure,  this  calculus 
codifies  only  a  fragment  of  formal  logic,  and  its  vo- 
cabulary and  formal  apparatus  do  not  suffice  to  de- 
velop even  elementary  arithmetic.  Hilbert's  program, 
however,  is  not  so  limited.  It  can  be  carried  out  suc- 
cessfully for  more  inclusive  systems,  which  can  be 
shown  by  meta-mathematical  reasoning  to  be  both  con- 
sistent and  complete.  By  way  of  example,  an  absolute 
proof  of  consistency  is  available  for  a  system  of  arith- 
metic that  permits  the  addition  of  cardinal  numbers 
though  not  their  multiplication.  But  is  Hilbert's 
finitistic  method  powerful  enough  to  prove  the  con- 
sistency of  a  system  such  as  Principia,  whose  vocabulary 
and  logical  apparatus  are  adequate  to  express  the  whole 
of  arithmetic  and  not  merely  a  fragment  Repeated  at- 
tempts to  construct  such  a  proof  were  unsuccessful; 
and  the  publication  of  Godel's  paper  in  1931  showed, 

57 


58     Godel's  Proof 

finally,  that  all  such  efforts  operating  within  the  strict 
limits  of  Hilbert's  original  program  must  fail. 

What  did  Godel  establish,  and  how  did  he  prove  his 
results  His  main  conclusions  are  twofold.  In  the  first 
place  (though  this  is  not  the  order  of  Godel's  actual 
argument),  he  showed  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  a 
meta-mathematical  proof  of  the  consistency  of  a  system 
comprehensive  enough  to  contain  the  whole  of  arith- 
metic— unless  the  proof  itself  employs  rules  of  infer- 
ence in  certain  essential  respects  different  from  the 
Transformation  Rules  used  in  deriving  theorems 
within  the  system.  Such  a  proof  may,  to  be  sure,  possess 
great  value  and  importance.  However,  if  the  reasoning 
in  it  is  based  on  rules  of  inference  much  more  power- 
ful than  the  rules  of  the  arithmetical  calculus,  so  that 
the  consistency  of  the  assumptions  in  the  reasoning  is 
as  subject  to  doubt  as  is  the  consistency  of  arithmetic, 
the  proof  would  yield  only  a  specious  victory  one 
dragon  slain  only  to  create  another.  In  any  event,  if  the 
proof  is  not  finitistic,  it  does  not  realize  the  aims  of  Hil- 
bert's original  program;  and  Godel's  argument  makes 
it  unlikely  that  a  finitistic  proof  of  the  consistency  of 
arithmetic  can  be  given. 

Godel's  second  main  conclusion  is  even  more  sur- 
prising and  revolutionary,  because  it  demonstrates  a 
fundamental  limitation  in  the  power  of  the  axiomatic 
method.  Godel  showed  that  Principia,  or  any  other 
system  within  which  arithmetic  can  be  developed,  is 
essentially  incomplete.  In  other  words,  given  any  con- 
sistent set  of  arithmetical  axioms,  there  are  true  arith- 


The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics     59 

metical  statements  that  cannot  be  derived  from  the  set. 
This  crucial  point  deserves  illustration.  Mathematics 
abounds  in  general  statements  to  which  no  exceptions 
have  been  found  that  thus  far  have  thwarted  all  at- 
tempts at  proof.  A  classical  illustration  is  known  as 
Goldbach's  theorem'  which  states  that  every  even 
number  is  the  sum  of  two  primes.  No  even  number 
has  ever  been  found  that  is  not  the  sum  of  two  primes, 
yet  no  one  has  succeeded  in  finding  a  proof  that  Gold- 
bach's conjecture  applies  without  exception  to  all  even 
numbers.  Here,  then,  is  an  example  of  an  arithmetical 
statement  that  may  be  true,  but  may  be  non-derivable 
from  the  axioms  of  arithmetic.  Suppose,  now,  that 
Goldbach's  conjecture  were  indeed  universally  true, 
though  not  derivable  from  the  axioms.  What  of  the 
suggestion  that  in  this  eventuality  the  axioms  could  be 
modified  or  augmented  so  as  to  make  hitherto  unprova- 
ble statements  (such  as  Goldbach's  on  our  supposition) 
derivable  in  the  enlarged  system  Godel's  results  show 
that  even  if  the  supposition  were  correct  the  sugges- 
tion would  still  provide  no  final  cure  for  the  dif- 
ficulty. That  is,  even  if  the  axioms  of  arithmetic  are 
augmented  by  an  indefinite  number  of  other  true 
ones,  there  will  always  be  further  arithmetical  truths 
that  are  not  formally  derivable  from  the  augmented 
set.13 


13  Such  further  truths  may,  as  we  shall  see,  be  established  by 
some  form  of  meta-mathematical  reasoning  about  an  arith- 
metical system.    But  this  procedure  does  not  fit  the  require- 


60     Godel's  Proof 

How  did  Godel  prove  these  conclusions  Up  to  a 
point  the  structure  of  his  argument  is  modeled,  as  he 
himself  pointed  out,  on  the  reasoning  involved  in  one 
of  the  logical  antinomies  known  as  the  Richard  Para- 
dox, first  propounded  by  the  French  mathematician 
Jules  Richard  in  1905.  We  shall  outline  this  paradox. 

Consider  a  language  (e.g.,  English)  in  which  the 
purely  arithmetical  properties  of  cardinal  numbers  can 
be  formulated  and  defined.  Let  us  examine  the  defini- 
tions that  can  be  stated  in  the  language.  It  is  clear  that, 
on  pain  of  circularity  or  infinite  regress,  some  terms  re- 
ferring to  arithmetical  properties  cannot  be  defined 
explicitly — for  we  cannot  define  everything  and  must 
start  somewhere — though  they  can,  presumably,  be 
understood  in  some  other  way.  For  our  purposes  it 
does  not  matter  which  are  the  undefined  or  primi- 
tive terms;  we  may  assume,  for  example,  that  we 
understand  what  is  meant  by  'an  integer  is  divisible  by 
another',  'an  integer  is  the  product  of  two  integers',  and 
so  on.  The  property  of  being  a  prime  number  may 
then  be  defined  by  'not  divisible  by  any  integer  other 
than  1  and  itself;  the  property  of  being  a  perfect 
square  may  be  defined  by  'being  the  product  of  some 
integer  by  itself;  and  so  on. 

We  can  readily  see  that  each  such  definition  will  con- 


ment  that  the  calculus  must,  so  to  speak,  be  self-contained,  and 
that  the  truths  in  question  must  be  exhibited  as  the  formal 
consequences  of  the  specified  axioms  within  the  system.  There 
is,  then,  an  inherent  limitation  in  the  axiomatic  method  as  a 
way  of  systematizing  the  whole  of  arithmetic. 


The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics    61 

tain  only  a  finite  number  of  words,  and  therefore  only 
a  finite  number  of  letters  of  the  alphabet.  This  being 
the  case,  the  definitions  can  be  placed  in  serial  order  a 
definition  will  precede  another  if  the  number  of  letters 
in  the  first  is  smaller  than  the  number  of  letters  in  the 
second;  and,  if  two  definitions  have  the  same  number 
of  letters,  one  of  them  will  precede  the  other  on  the 
basis  of  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  letters  in  each.  On 
the  basis  of  this  order,  a  unique  integer  will  correspond 
to  each  definition  and  will  represent  the  number  of  the 
place  that  the  definition  occupies  in  the  series.  For  ex- 
ample, the  definition  with  the  smallest  number  of  let- 
ters will  correspond  to  the  number  1,  the  next  defini- 
tion in  the  series  will  correspond  to  2,  and  so  on. 

Since  each  definition  is  associated  with  a  unique  in- 
teger, it  may  turn  out  in  certain  cases  that  an  integer 
will  possess  the  very  property  designated  by  the  defini- 
tion with  which  the  integer  is  correlated.14  Suppose, 
for  instance,  the  defining  expression  'not  divisible  by 
any  integer  other  than  1  and  itself  happens  to  be 
correlated  with  the  order  number  17;  obviously  17  it- 
self has  the  property  designated  by  that  expression.  On 
the  other  hand,  suppose  the  defining  expression  'being 
the  product  of  some  integer  by  itself  were  correlated 
with  the  order  number  15;  15  clearly  does  not  have  the 


14  This  is  the  same  sort  of  thing  that  would  happen  if  the 
English  word  'short'  appeared  in  a  list  of  words,  and  we 
characterized  each  word  of  the  list  by  the  descriptive  tags 
short  or  long.  The  word  'short'  would  then  have  the  tag 
short  attached  to  it. 


62     Godel's  Proof 

property  designated  by  the  expression.  We  shall  de- 
scribe the  state  of  affairs  in  the  second  example  by  say- 
ing that  the  number  15  has  the  property  of  being 
Richardian;  and,  in  the  first  example,  by  saying  that 
the  number  17  does  not  have  the  property  of  being 
Richardian.  More  generally,  we  define  'x  is  Rich- 
ardian' as  a  shorthand  way  of  stating  'x  does  not  have 
the  property  designated  by  the  defining  expression 
with  which  x  is  correlated  in  the  serially  ordered  set  of 
definitions'. 

We  come  now  to  a  curious  but  characteristic  turn  in 
the  statement  of  the  Richard  Paradox.  The  defining 
expression  for  the  property  of  being  Richardian  os- 
tensibly describes  a  numerical  property  of  integers. 
The  expression  itself  therefore  belongs  to  the  series  of 
definitions  proposed  above.  It  follows  that  the  ex- 
pression is  correlated  with  a  position-fixing  integer  or 
number.  Suppose  this  number  is  n.  We  now  pose  the 
question,  reminiscent  of  Russell's  antinomy  Is  n  Rich- 
ardian The  reader  can  doubtless  anticipate  the  fatal 
contradiction  that  now  threatens.  For  n  is  Richardian 
if,  and  only  if,  n  does  not  have  the  property  designated 
by  the  defining  expression  with  which  n  is  correlated 
(i.e.,  it  does  not  have  the  property  of  being  Rich- 
ardian). In  short,  n  is  Richardian  if,  and  only  if,  n  is 
not  Richardian;  so  that  the  statement  'n  is  Richardian' 
is  both  true  and  false. 

We  must  now  point  out  that  the  contradiction  is,  in 
a  sense,  a  hoax  produced  by  not  playing  the  game  quite 
fairly.    An  essential  but  tacit  assumption  underlying 


The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics     63 

the  serial  ordering  of  definitions  was  conveniently 
dropped  along  the  way.  It  was  agreed  to  consider  the 
definitions  of  the  purely  arithmetical  properties  of  in- 
tegers— properties  that  can  be  formulated  with  the 
help  of  such  notions  as  arithmetical  addition,  multipli- 
cation, and  the  like.  But  then,  without  warning,  we 
were  asked  to  accept  a  definition  in  the  series  that  in- 
volves reference  to  the  notation  used  in  formulating 
arithmetical  properties.  More  specifically,  the  defini- 
tion of  the  property  of  being  Richardian  does  not  be- 
long to  the  series  initially  intended,  because  this  defini- 
tion involves  meta-mathematical  notions  such  as  the 
number  of  letters  (or  signs)  occurring  in  expressions. 
We  can  outflank  the  Richard  Paradox  by  distinguish- 
ing carefully  between  statements  within  arithmetic 
(which  make  no  reference  to  any  system  of  notation) 
and  statements  about  some  system  of  notation  in  which 
arithmetic  is  codified. 

The  reasoning  in  the  construction  of  the  Richard 
Paradox  is  clearly  fallacious.  The  construction  never- 
theless suggests  that  it  may  be  possible  to  map  or 
mirror  meta-mathematical  statements  about  a  suf- 
ficiently comprehensive  formal  system  in  the  system 
itself.  The  idea  of  mapping  is  well  known  and  plays 
a  fundamental  role  in  many  branches  of  mathematics. 
It  is  used,  of  course,  in  the  construction  of  ordinary 
maps,  where  shapes  on  the  surface  of  a  sphere  are  pro- 
jected onto  a  plane,  so  that  the  relations  between  the 
plane  figures  mirror  the  relations  between  the  fig- 
ures on  the  spherical  surface.   It  is  used  in  coordinate 


64     Godel's  Proof 

geometry,  which  translates  geometry  into  algebra,  so 
that  geometric  relations  are  mapped  by  algebraic  ones. 
(The  reader  will  recall  the  discussion  in  Section  II, 
which  explained  how  Hilbert  used  algebra  to  estab- 
lish the  consistency  of  his  axioms  for  geometry.  What 
Hilbert  did,  in  effect,  was  to  map  geometry  onto  alge- 
bra.) Mapping  also  plays  a  role  in  mathematical  phys- 
ics where,  for  example,  relations  between  properties  of 
electric  currents  are  represented  in  the  language  of 
hydrodynamics.  And  mapping  is  involved  when  a  pilot 
model  is  constructed  before  proceeding  with  a  full-size 
machine,  when  a  small  wing  surface  is  observed  for  its 
aerodynamic  properties  in  a  wind  tunnel,  or  when  a 
laboratory  rig  made  up  of  electric  circuits  is  used  to 
study  the  relations  between  large-size  masses  in  motion. 
A  striking  visual  example  is  presented  in  Fig.  3,  which 
illustrates  a  species  of  mapping  that  occurs  in  a  branch 
of  mathematics  known  as  projective  geometry. 

The  basic  feature  of  mapping  is  that  an  abstract 
structure  of  relations  embodied  in  one  domain  of  ob- 
jects can  be  shown  to  hold  between  objects  (usually 

%•  3 

Figure  3  (a)  illustrates  the  Theorem  of  Pappus  If  A,  B,  C 
are  any  three  distinct  points  on  a  line  I,  and  A',  B',  C  any 
three  distinct  points  on  another  line  II,  the  three  points  R, 
S,  T  determined  by  the  pair  of  lines  AB'  and  A'B,  BC  and 
B'C,  CA'  and  C'A,  respectively,  are  collinear  (i.e.,  lie  on 
line  III). 

Figure  3  (b)  illustrates  the  dual  of  the  above  theorem  If 
A,  B,  C  are  any  three  distinct  lines  on  a  point  I,  and  A',  B',  C 
any  three  distinct  lines  on  another  point  II,  the  three  lines  R, 
S,  T  determined  by  the  pair  of  points  AB'  and  A'B,  BC  and 


C'-^  II 


(a) 


B'C,  CA'  and  C'A,  respectively,  are  copunctal    (i.e.,  lie  on 
point  III). 

The  two  figures  have  the  same  abstract  structure,  though  in 
appearance  they  are  markedly  different.  Figure  3  (a)  is  so  re- 
lated to  Figure  3  (b)  that  points  of  the  former  correspond  to 
lines  of  the  latter,  while  lines  of  the  former  correspond  to 
points  of  the  latter.  In  effect,  (b)  is  a  map  of  (a)  a  point  in 
(b)  represents  (or  is  the  mirror  image  of)  a  line  in  (a),  while 
a  line  in   (b)  represents  a  point  in   (a). 


66     Godel's  Proof 

of  a  sort  different  from  the  first  set)  in  another  domain. 
It  is  this  feature  which  stimulated  Godel  in  construct- 
ing his  proofs.  If  complicated  meta-mathematical  state- 
ments about  a  formalized  system  of  arithmetic  could, 
as  he  hoped,  be  translated  into  (or  mirrored  by)  arith- 
metical statements  within  the  system  itself,  an  impor- 
tant gain  would  be  achieved  in  facilitating  meta- 
mathematical  demonstrations.  For  just  as  it  is  easier  to 
deal  with  the  algebraic  formulas  representing  (or  mir- 
roring) intricate  geometrical  relations  between  curves 
and  surfaces  in  space  than  with  the  geometrical  rela- 
tions themselves,  so  it  is  easier  to  deal  with  the  arith- 
metical counterparts  (or  mirror  images)  of  complex 
logical  relations  than  with  the  logical  relations  them- 
selves. 

The  exploitation  of  the  notion  of  mapping  is  the  key 
to  the  argument  in  Godel's  famous  paper.  Following 
the  style  of  the  Richard  Paradox,  but  carefully  avoiding 
the  fallacy  involved  in  its  construction,  Godel  showed 
that  meta-mathematical  statements  about  a  formalized 
arithmetical  calculus  can  indeed  be  represented  by 
arithmetical  formulas  within  the  calculus.  As  we  shall 
explain  in  greater  detail  in  the  next  section,  he  de- 
vised a  method  of  representation  such  that  neither  the 
arithmetical  formula  corresponding  to  a  certain  true 
meta-mathematical  statement  about  the  formula,  nor 
the  arithmetical  formula  corresponding  to  the  denial 
of  the  statement,  is  demonstrable  within  the  calculus. 
Since  one  of  these  arithmetical  formulas  must  codify  an 
arithmetical  truth,  yet  neither  is  derivable  from  the 


The  Idea  of  Mapping  and  Its  Use  in  Mathematics     67 

axioms,  the  axioms  are  incomplete.  Godel's  method  of 
representation  also  enabled  him  to  construct  an  arith- 
metical formula  corresponding  to  the  meta-mathe- 
matical  statement  'The  calculus  is  consistent'  and 
to  show  that  this  formula  is  not  demonstrable  within 
the  calculus.  It  follows  that  the  meta-mathematical 
statement  cannot  be  established  unless  rules  of  in- 
ference are  used  that  cannot  be  represented  within  the 
calculus,  so  that,  in  proving  the  statement,  rules  must 
be  employed  whose  own  consistency  may  be  as  ques- 
tionable as  the  consistency  of  arithmetic  itself.  Godel 
established  these  major  conclusions  by  using  a  remark- 
ably ingenious  form  of  mapping. 


VII 


Gddel's  Proofs 

Godel's  paper  is  difficult.  Forty-six  preliminary  defini- 
tions, together  with  several  important  preliminary 
theorems,  must  be  mastered  before  the  main  results  are 
reached.  We  shall  take  a  much  easier  road;  neverthe- 
less, it  should  afford  the  reader  glimpses  of  the  ascent 
and  of  the  crowning  structure. 

A     Gbdel  numbering 

Godel  described  a  formalized  calculus  within  which  all 
the  customary  arithmetical  notations  can  be  ex-pressed 
and  familiar  arithmetical  relations  established.15  The 
formulas  of  the  calculus  are  constructed  out  of  a  class 
of  elementary  signs,  which  constitute  the  fundamental 
vocabulary.  A  set  of  primitive  formulas  (or  axioms) 
are  the  underpinning,  and  the  theorems  of  the  calculus 
are  formulas  derivable  from  the  axioms  with  the  help 


15  He  used  an  adaptation  of  the  system  developed  in  Prin- 
cipia  Mathematica.  But  any  calculus  within  which  the  cardinal 
number  system  can  be  constructed  would  have  served  his  pur- 
pose. 

68 


Go  del  Numbering    69 

of  a  carefully  enumerated  set  of  Transformation 
Rules  (or  rules  of  inference). 

Godel  first  showed  that  it  is  possible  to  assign  a 
unique  number  to  each  elementary  sign,  each  formula 
(or  sequence  of  signs),  and  each  proof  (or  finite  se- 
quence of  formulas).  This  number,  which  serves  as  a 
distinctive  tag  or  label,  is  called  the  Godel  number 
of  the  sign,  formula,  or  proof.16 

The  elementary  signs  belonging  to  the  fundamental 
vocabulary  are  of  two  kinds  the  constant  signs  and  the 
variables.  We  shall  assume  that  there  are  exactly  ten 
constant  signs,17  to  which  the  integers  from  1  to  10  are 
attached  as  Godel  numbers.  Most  of  these  signs  are 
already  known  to  the  reader  '~'  (short  for  'not');  'V 
(short  for  'or');  'D'  (short  for  'if  .  .  .  then  .  .  .');  '=' 
(short  for  'equals');  '0'  (the  numeral  for  the  number 
zero);  and  three  signs  of  punctuation,  namely,  the  left 
parenthesis  '(',  the  right  parenthesis  ')',  and  the  comma 
','.  In  addition,  two  other  signs  will  be  used  the  in- 
verted letter  '3',  which  may  be  read  as  'there  is'  and 
which   occurs   in   existential   quantifiers;    and    the 


16  There  are  many  alternative  ways  of  assigning  Godel 
numbers,  and  it  is  immaterial  to  the  main  argument  which  is 
adopted.  We  give  a  concrete  example  of  how  the  numbers  can 
be  assigned  to  help  the  reader  follow  the  discussion.  The 
method  of  numbering  used  in  the  text  was  employed  by 
Godel  in  his  1931  paper. 

17  The  number  of  constant  signs  depends  on  how  the  formal 
calculus  is  set  up.  Godel  in  his  paper  used  only  seven  con- 
stant signs.  The  text  uses  ten  in  order  to  avoid  certain  com- 
plexities in  the  exposition. 


70     Godel's  Proof 

lower-case  V,  which  is  attached  to  numerical  expres- 
sions to  designate  the  immediate  successor  of  a  num- 
ber. To  illustrate  the  formula  '(3x)(x  =  sO)'  may  be 
read  'There  is  an  x  such  that  x  is  the  immediate  suc- 
cessor of  0'.  The  table  below  displays  the  ten  constant 
signs,  states  the  Godel  number  associated  with  each, 
and  indicates  the  usual  meanings  of  the  signs. 


Constant 

Godel 

Signs 

Number 

Meaning 

■W 

l 

not 

V 

2 

or 

D 

3 

If  .  .  .  then 

3 

4 

There  is  an  .  .  . 

— 

5 

equals 

0 

6 

zero 

s 

7 

The   immediate 
successor  of 

( 

8 

punctuation  mark 

) 

9 

punctuation  mark 

9 

io 
Table  2 

punctuation  mark 

Besides  the  constant  elementary  signs,  three  kinds 
of  variables  appear  in  the  fundamental  vocabulary 
of  the  calculus  the  numerical  variables  'x  ,  'y  ,  'z', 
etc.,    for    which    numerals    and    numerical    expres- 


Godel  Numbering    71 

sions  may  be  substituted;  the  sentential  variables  'p', 
'q  V,  etc.,  for  which  formulas  (sentences)  may  be 
substituted;  and  the  predicate  variables  'P' ,  lQ',  'R', 
etc.,  for  which  predicates,  such  as  'Prime'  or  'Greater 
than',  may  be  substituted.  The  variables  are  assigned 
Godel  numbers  in  accordance  with  the  following  rules 
associate  (i)  with  each  distinct  numerical  variable  a 
distinct  prime  number  greater  than  10;  (ii)  with  each 
distinct  sentential  variable  the  square  of  a  prime  num- 
ber greater  than  10;  and  (iii)  with  each  distinct  predi- 
cate variable  the  cube  of  a  prime  greater  than  10.  The 
accompanying  table  illustrates  the  use  of  these  rules  to 
specify  the  Godel  numbers  of  a  few  variables. 


Numerical 

Godel 

A  Possible 

Variable 

Number 

Substitution  Instance 

X 

11 

0 

y 

13 

sO 

z 

17 

y 

Numerical    variables    are    associated    with    prime    numbers 
greater  than  10. 


Sentential 

Godel 

A  Possible 

Variable 

Number 

Substitution  Instance 

p 

112 

0  =  0 

9 

132 

(lx)(x  =  sy) 

r 

if 

pDq 

Sentential  variables  are  associated  with  the  squares  of  prime 
numbers  greater  than  10. 


72 

Godel's  Proof 

Predicate 

Godel 

A  Possible 

Variable 

Number 

Substitution  Instance 

P 

ii3 

Prime 

a 

133 

Composite 

R 

if 

Greater  than 

Predicate  Variables  are  associated  with  the  cubes  of  prime 
numbers  greater  than  10. 

Table  3 


Consider  next  a  formula  of  the  system,  for  example, 
lx)(x  =  sy)'.  (Literally  translated,  this  reads  'There 
is  an  x  such  that  x  is  the  immediate  successor  of  y' ,  and 
says,  in  effect,  that  every  number  has  an  immediate  suc- 
cessor.) The  numbers  associated  with  its  ten  con- 
stituent elementary  signs  are,  respectively,  8,  4,  11,  9, 
8,  11,  5,  7,  13,  9.   We  show  this  schematically  below 

(3tf)(#-=s'sy) 

V  v  V  v  y  v  v  v  ▼  ▼ 

8    4    11    9    8    11     5     7   13    9 

It  is  desirable,  however,  to  assign  a  single  number  to 
the  formula  rather  than  a  set  of  numbers.  This  can  be 
done  easily.  We  agree  to  associate  with  the  formula  the 
unique  number  that  is  the  product  of  the  first  ten 
primes  in  order  of  magnitude,  each  prime  being  raised 
to  a  power  equal  to  the  Godel  number  of  the  cor- 
responding elementary  sign.  The  above  formula  is  ac- 
cordingly associated  with  the  number 


Godel  Numbering    73 

28  X  34  X  511  X  f  X  1 18  X  1311  X  175  X  197 

X  2313  X  29°; 

let  us  refer  to  this  number  as  m.  In  a  similar  fashion,  a 
unique  number,  the  product  of  as  many  primes  as 
there  are  signs  (each  prime  being  raised  to  a  power 
equal  to  the  Godel  number  of  the  corresponding  sign), 
can  be  assigned  to  every  finite  sequence  of  elementary 
signs  and,  in  particular,  to  every  formula.18 

Consider,  finally,  a  sequence  of  formulas,  such  as 
may  occur  in  some  proof,  e.g.,  the  sequence 

(3)(x  =  sy) 
(3x)(  ==  sO) 

The  second  formula  when  translated  reads  '0  has  an 


18  Signs  may  occur  in  the  calculus  which  do  not  appear  in 
the  fundamental  vocabulary;  these  are  introduced  by  denning 
them  with  the  help  of  the  vocabulary  signs.  For  example,  the 
sign  '•',  the  sentential  connective  used  as  an  abbreviation  for 
'and',  can  be  denned  in  context  as  follows  p  •  q'  is  short  for 
'~  (~  p  V  «  q)'.  What  Godel  number  is  assigned  to  a  de- 
fined sign  The  answer  is  obvious  if  we  notice  that  expressions 
containing  defined  signs  can  be  eliminated  in  favor  of  their 
defining  equivalents;  and  it  is  clear  that  a  Godel  number  can 
be  determined  for  the  transformed  expressions.  Accordingly, 
the  Godel  number  of  the  formula  'p  •  q'  is  the  Godel  number 
of  the  formula  '~  (~  p  V  ~  q)  Similarly,  the  various  nu- 
merals can  be  introduced  by  definition  as  follows  '1'  as  short 
for  'sO',  '2'  as  short  for  ss0',  '3'  as  short  for  'sssO',  and  so  on. 
To  obtain  the  Godel  number  for  the  formula  '^  (2  =  3)',  we 
eliminate  the  defined  signs,  thus  obtaining  the  formula 
'^  (ssO  ==  sssO)',  and  determine  its  Godel  number  pursuant  to 
the  rules  stated  in  the  text. 


74     Godel's  Proof 

immediate  successor';  it  is  derivable  from  the  first  by 
substituting  the  numeral  '0'  for  the  numerical  variable 
'y'.19  We  have  already  determined  the  Godel  number 
of  the  first  formula  it  is  m;  and  suppose  that  n  is  the 
Godel  number  of  the  second  formula.  As  before,  it  is 
convenient  to  have  a  single  number  as  a  tag  for  the 
sequence.  We  agree  therefore  to  associate  with  it  the 
number  which  is  the  product  of  the  first  two  primes  in 
order  of  magnitude  (i.e.,  the  primes  2  and  3),  each 
prime  being  raised  to  a  power  equal  to  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  the  corresponding  formula  in  the  sequence.  If 
we  call  this  number  k,  we  can  write  k  =  2m  X  3W-  By 
applying  this  compact  procedure  we  can  obtain  a  num- 
ber for  each  sequence  of  formulas.  In  sum,  every  ex- 
pression in  the  system,  whether  an  elementary  sign,  a 
sequence  of  signs,  or  a  sequence  of  sequences,  can  be 
assigned  a  unique  Godel  number. 

What  has  been  done  so  far  is  to  establish  a  method 
for  completely  arithmetizing  the  formal  calculus. 
The  method  is  essentially  a  set  of  directions  for  setting 
up  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the  expres- 
sions in  the  calculus  and  a  certain  subset  of  the  in- 


19  The  reader  will  recall  that  we  defined  a  proof  as  a  finite 
sequence  of  formulas,  each  of  which  either  is  an  axiom  or  can 
be  derived  from  preceding  formulas  in  the  sequence  with  the 
help  of  the  Transformation  Rules.  By  this  definition  the 
above  sequence  is  not  a  proof,  since  the  first  formula  is  not  an 
axiom  and  its  derivation  from  the  axioms  is  not  shown  the 
sequence  is  only  a  segment  of  a  proof.  It  would  take  too  long 
to  write  out  a  full  example  of  a  proof,  and  for  illustrative 
purposes  the  above  sequence  will  suffice. 


Godel  Numbering     75 

tegers.20  Once  an  expression  is  given,  the  Godel  num- 
ber uniquely  corresponding  to  it  can  be  calculated. 
But  this  is  only  half  the  story.  Once  a  number  is  given, 
we  can  determine  whether  it  is  a  Godel  number,  and,  if 
it  is,  the  expression  it  represents  can  be  exactly  ana- 
lyzed or  retrieved.  If  a  given  number  is  less  than  or 
equal  to  10,  it  is  the  Godel  number  of  an  elementary 
constant  sign.  The  sign  can  be  identified.  If  the  num- 
ber is  greater  than  10,  it  can  be  decomposed  into  its 
prime  factors  in  just  one  way  (as  we  know  from  a  fa- 
mous theorem  of  arithmetic).21  If  it  is  a  prime  greater 
than  1  o,  or  the  second  or  third  power  of  such  a  prime, 
it  is  the  Godel  number  of  an  identifiable  variable.  If  it 
is  the  product  of  successive  primes,  each  raised  to  some 
power,  it  may  be  the  Godel  number  either  of  a  formula 


20  Not  every  integer  is  a  Godel  number.  Consider,  for  ex- 
ample, the  number  100.  100  is  greater  than  10,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  the  Godel  number  of  an  elementary  constant  sign; 
and  since  it  is  neither  a  prime  greater  than  10,  nor  the  square' 
nor  the  cube  of  such  a  prime,  it  cannot  be  the  Godel  number 
of  a  variable.  On  decomposing  100  into  its  prime  factors,  we 
find  that  it  is  equal  to  22  X  52;  and  the  prime  number  3  does 
not  appear  as  a  factor  in  the  decomposition,  but  is  skipped. 
According  to  the  rules  laid  down,  however,  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  a  formula  (or  of  a  sequence  of  formulas)  must  be  the 
product  of  successive  primes,  each  raised  to  some  power.  The 
number  100  does  not  satisfy  this  condition.  In  short,  100  can- 
not be  assigned  to  constant  signs,  variables,  or  formulas;  hence 
it  is  not  a  Godel  number. 

21  This  theorem  is  known  as  the  fundamental  theorem  of 
arithmetic.  It  says  that  if  an  integer  is  composite  (i.e.,  not  a 
prime)  it  has  a  unique  decomposition  into  prime  factors. 


76     Godel's  Proof 

or  of  a  sequence  of  formulas.  In  this  case  the  expres- 
sion to  which  it  corresponds  can  be  exactly  determined. 
Following  this  program,  we  can  take  any  given  number 
apart,  as  if  it  were  a  machine,  discover  how  it  is  con- 
structed and  what  goes  into  it;  and  since  each  of  its 
elements  corresponds  to  an  element  of  the  expression 
it  represents,  we  can  reconstitute  the  expression,  ana- 
lyze its  structure,  and  the  like.  Table  4  illustrates  for 
a  given  number  how  we  can  ascertain  whether  it  is  a 
Godel  number  and,  if  so,  what  expression  it  symbolizes. 


A 

243,000,000 

B 

64  X  243  X  15625 

C 

26  X  35  X  56 

5  6 


D  1  i  1 

0     =     0 


E  0  =  0 

The  arithmetical  formula  'zero  equals  zero'  has 
the  Godel  number  243  million.  Reading  down 
from  A  to  E,  the  illustration  shows  how  the  num- 
ber is  translated  into  the  expression  it  represents; 
reading  up,  how  the  number  for  the  formula  is 
derived. 

Table  4 

B    The  ariihmetization  of  meta-mathematics 
Godel's  next  step  is  an  ingenious  application  of  map- 
ping.   He  showed  that  all   meta-mathematical  state- 


The  Arithmetization  of  M eta-mathematics     77 

ments  about  the  structural  properties  of  expressions  in 
the  calculus  can  be  adequately  mirrored  within  the 
calculus  itself.  The  basic  idea  underlying  his  pro- 
cedure is  this  Since  every  expression  in  the  calculus  is 
associated  with  a  (Godel)  number,  a  meta-mathe- 
matical  statement  about  expressions  and  their  relations 
to  one  another  may  be  construed  as  a  statement  about 
the  corresponding  (Godel)  numbers  and  their  arith- 
metical relations  to  one  another.  In  this  way  meta- 
mathematics  becomes  completely  arithmetized.  To 
take  a  trivial  analogue  customers  in  a  busy  super- 
market are  often  given,  when  they  enter,  tickets  on 
which  are  printed  numbers  whose  order  determines 
the  order  in  which  the  customers  are  to  be  waited  on  at 
the  meat  counter.  By  inspecting  the  numbers  it  is  easy 
to  tell  how  many  persons  have  been  served,  how  many 
are  waiting,  who  precedes  whom,  and  by  how  many 
customers,  and  so  on.  If,  for  example,  Mrs.  Smith  has 
number  37,  and  Mrs.  Brown  number  53,  instead  of  ex- 
plaining to  Mrs.  Brown  that  she  has  to  wait  her  turn 
after  Mrs.  Smith,  it  suffices  to  point  out  that  37  is  less 
than  53. 

As  in  the  supermarket,  so  in  meta-mathematics. 
Each  meta-mathematical  statement  is  represented  by  a 
unique  formula  within  arithmetic;  and  the  relations  of 
logical  dependence  between  meta-mathematical  state- 
ments are  fully  reflected  in  the  numerical  relations  of 
dependence  between  their  corresponding  arithmetical 
formulas.  Once  again  mapping  facilitates  an  inquiry 
into  structure.   The  exploration  of  meta-mathematical 


78     Godel's  Proof 

questions  can  be  pursued  by  investigating  the  arith- 
metical properties  and  relations  of  certain  integers. 

We  illustrate  these  general  remarks  by  an  elemen- 
tary example.  Consider  the  first  axiom  of  the  senten- 
tial calculus,  which  also  happens  to  be  an  axiom  in  the 
formal  system  under  discussion  p  V  p)  D  p  Its  Godel 
number  is  28  X  3112  X  52  X  fr~  X  1 19  X  133  X  17112, 
which  we  shall  designate  by  the  letter  V.  Consider 
also  the  formula  '(pvp)',  whose  Godel  number  is 
28  X  3112  X  52  X  7112  X  1 19;  we  shall  designate  it  by  the 
letter  'b'.  We  now  assert  the  meta-mathematical  state- 
ment that  the  formula  '(p  V  p)'  is  an  initial  part  of  the 
axiom.  To  what  arithmetical  formula  in  the  formal 
system  does  this  statement  correspond  It  is  evident 
that  the  smaller  formula  '(p  V  py  can  be  an  initial  part 
of  the  larger  formula  which  is  the  axiom  if,  and  only  if, 
the  (Godel)  number  b,  representing  the  former,  is  a 
factor  of  the  (Godel)  number  a,  representing  the 
latter.  On  the  assumption  that  the  expression  'factor 
of  is  suitably  defined  in  the  formalized  arithmetical 
system,  the  arithmetical  formula  which  uniquely  cor- 
responds to  the  above  meta-mathematical  statement  is 
(b  is  a  factor  of  a.  Moreover,  if  this  formula  is  true, 
i.e.,  if  b  is  a  factor  of  a,  then  it  is  true  that  p  Vp)'  is 
an  initial  part  of  l(p  V  p)  D  p 

Let  us  fix  attention  on  the  meta-mathematical  state- 
ment 'The  sequence  of  formulas  with  Godel  number 
x  is  a  proof  of  the  formula  with  Godel  number  z  This 
statement  is  represented  (mirrored)  by  a  definite  for- 
mula in  the  arithmetical  calculus  which  expresses  a 


The  Arithmetization  of  M eta-mathematics    79 

purely  arithmetical  relation  between  x  and  z.  (We  can 
gain  some  notion  of  the  complexity  of  this  relation  by 
recalling  the  example  used  above,  in  which  the  Godel 
number  k  —  2m  X  3  was  assigned  to  the  (fragment  of 
a)  proof  whose  conclusion  has  the  Godel  number  n.  A 
little  reflection  shows  that  there  is  here  a  definite, 
though  by  no  means  simple,  arithmetical  relation  be- 
tween h,  the  Godel  number  of  the  proof,  and  n,  the 
Godel  number  of  the  conclusion.)  We  write  this  rela- 
tion between  x  and  z  as  the  formula  'Dem  (x,  z)  to  re- 
mind ourselves  of  the  meta-mathematical  statement  to 
which  it  corresponds  (i.e.,  of  the  meta-mathematical 
statement  'The  sequence  of  formulas  with  Godel  num- 
ber x  is  a  proof  (or  demonstration)  of  the  formula  with 
Godel  number  z').22  We  now  ask  the  reader  to  ob- 
serve that  a  meta-mathematical  statement  which  says 
that  a  certain  sequence  of  formulas  is  a  proof  for  a 
given  formula  is  true,  if,  and  only  if,  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  the  alleged  proof  stands  to  the  Godel  number  of 
the  conclusion  in  the  arithmetical  relation  here  desig- 
nated by  'Dem'.  Accordingly,  to  establish  the  truth  or 
falsity  of  the  meta-mathematical  statement  under  dis- 
cussion, we  need  concern  ourselves  only  with  the  ques- 


22  The  reader  must  keep  clearly  in  mind  that,  though 
'Dem  (x,  z)'  represents  the  meta-mathematical  statement,  the 
formula  itself  belongs  to  the  arithmetical  calculus.  The  for- 
mula could  be  written  in  more  customary  notation  as 
lf(x,  z)  =  0',  where  the  letter  'f  denotes  a  complex  set  of 
arithmetical  operations  upon  numbers.  But  this  more  cus- 
tomary notation  does  not  immediately  suggest  the  meta- 
mathematical  interpretation  of  the  formula. 


80     Godel's  Proof 

tion  whether  the  relation  Dem  holds  between  two 
numbers.  Conversely,  we  can  establish  that  the  arith- 
metical relation  holds  between  a  pair  of  numbers  by 
showing  that  the  meta-mathematical  statement  mir- 
rored by  this  relation  between  the  numbers  is  true. 
Similarly,  the  meta-mathematical  statement  'The  se- 
quence of  formulas  with  the  Godel  number  x  is  not  a. 
proof  for  the  formula  with  the  Godel  number  z'  is 
represented  by  a  definite  formula  in  the  formalized 
arithmetical  system.  This  formula  is  the  formal  con- 
tradictory of  'Dem  (x,  z)  namely,  '~  Dem  (x,  z) 

One  additional  bit  of  special  notation  is  needed  for 
stating  the  crux  of  Godel's  argument.  Begin  with  an 
example.  The  formula  '(lx)(x  =  sy)'  has  m  for  its 
Godel  number  (see  page  73),  while  the  variable  'y'  has 
the  Godel  number  13.  Substitute  in  this  formula  for 
the  variable  with  Godel  number  13  (i.e.,  for  'y')  the  nu- 
meral for  m.  The  result  is  the  formula  '(3x)(x  =  sm)', 
which  says  literally  that  there  is  a  number  x  such  that 
x  is  the  immediate  successor  of  m.  This  latter  formula 
also  has  a  Godel  number,  which  can  be  calculated  quite 
easily.  But  instead  of  making  the  calculation,  we  can 
identify  the  number  by  an  unambiguous  meta-mathe- 
matical characterization  it  is  the  Godel  number  of  the 
formula  that  is  obtained  from  the  formula  with 
Godel  number  m,  by  substituting  for  the  variable  with 
Godel  number  13  the  numeral  for  m.  This  meta- 
mathematical  characterization  uniquely  determines  & 
definite  number  which  is  a  certain  arithmetical  func- 
tion of  the  numbers  m  and  13,  where  the  function  it- 


The  Arithmetization  of  M eta-mathematics     81 
self  can  be  expressed  within  the  formalized  system.23 


23  This  function  is  quite  complex.  Just  how  complex  be- 
comes evident  if  we  try  to  formulate  it  in  greater  detail.  Let 
us  attempt  such  a  formulation,  without  carrying  it  to  the 
bitter  end.  It  was  shown  on  page  73  that  m,  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  3x)(x  —  sy)',  is 

28  X  34  X  511  X  79  X  118  X  1311  X  175  X  197  X  2313  X  299. 

To  find  the  Godel  number  of  '(lx)(x  =  sra)'  (the  formula  ob- 
tained from  the  preceding  one  by  substituting  for  the  variable 
'y'  in  the  latter  the  numeral  for  m)  we  proceed  as  follows 
This  formula  contains  the  numeral  'm',  which  is  a  defined 
sign,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  content  of  footnote  18,  m 
must  be  replaced  by  its  defining  equivalent.  When  this  is 
done,  we  obtain  the  formula 

(lx)(x  =  ssssss  .  .  .  sO) 

where  the  letter  V  occurs  m  +  1  times.  This  formula  contains 
only  the  elementary  signs  belonging  to  the  fundamental  vo- 
cabulary, so  that  its  Godel  number  can  be  calculated.  To  do 
this,  we  first  obtain  the  series  of  Godel  numbers  associated 
with  the  elementary  signs  of  the  formula 

8,  4,  11,  9,  8,  11,  5,  7,  7,  7,  .  .  .  7,  6,  9 

in  which  the  number  7  occurs  m  +  1  times.  We  next  take 
the  product  of  the  first  m  +  10  primes  in  order  of  magnitude, 
each  prime  being  raised  to  a  power  equal  to  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  the  corresponding  elementary  sign.  Let  us  refer  to  this 
number  as  r,  so  that 

r=  28  X  34  X  511  X  79  X  118  X  1311  X  175  X  197  X  237 

X  297  X  317  X   .  .  .    X  p  +  10 

where  pm+10  is  the  (m  +  10) th  prime  in  order  of  magnitude. 

Now  compare  the  two  Godel  numbers  m  and  r.   m  contains 

a  prime  factor  raised  to  the  power  13;  r  contains  all  the  prime 

factors  of  m  and  many  others  besides,  but  none  of  them  are 


82     Godel's  Proof 

The  number  can  therefore  be  designated  within  the 
calculus.  This  designation  will  be  written  as  'sub  (m, 
13,  m)  the  purpose  of  this  form  being  to  recall  the 
meta-mathematical  characterization  which  it  repre- 
sents, viz.,  'the  Godel  number  of  the  formula  obtained 
from  the  formula  with  Godel  number  m,  by  substi- 
tuting for  the  variable  with  the  Godel  number  1 3  the  nu- 
meral for  m '.  We  can  now  drop  the  example  and  gen- 
eralize. The  reader  will  see  readily  that  the  expression 
'sub  (y,  13,  y)'  is  the  mirror  image  within  the  formal- 
ized arithmetical  calculus  of  the  meta-mathematical 
characterization  'the  Godel  number  of  the  formula 
that  is  obtained  from  the  formula  with  Godel  num- 
ber y,  by  substituting  for  the  variable  with  Godel  num- 
ber 13  the  numeral  for  y  He  will  also  note  that  when 
a  definite  numeral  is  substituted  for  'y'  in  'sub  (y,  13, 
yY — for  example,  the  numeral  for  m  or  the  numeral 
for  two  hundred  forty  three  million — the  resulting  ex- 
pression designates  a  definite  integer  which  is  the 
Godel  number  of  a  certain  formula.24 


raised  to  the  power  13.  The  number  r  can  thus  be  obtained 
from  the  number  m,  by  replacing  the  prime  factor  in  m  which 
is  raised  to  the  power  13  with  other  primes  raised  to  some 
power  different  from  13.  To  state  exactly  and  in  full  detail 
how  r  is  related  to  m  is  not  possible  without  introducing  a 
great  deal  of  additional  notational  apparatus;  this  is  done  in 
Godel's  original  paper.  But  enough  has  been  said  to  indicate 
that  the  number  r  is  a  definite  arithmetical  function  of  m  and 

13- 

24  Several  questions  may  occur  to  the  reader  that  need  to 
be  answered.   It  may  be  asked  why,  in  the  meta-mathematical 


The  Arithmetization  of  M  eta-mat  hematics 


characterization  just  mentioned,  we  say  that  it  is  the  nu- 
meral for  y  which  is  to  be  substituted  for  a  certain  variable, 
rather  than  the  number  y.  The  answer  depends  on  the 
distinction,  already  discussed,  between  mathematics  and  meta- 
mathematics,  and  calls  for  a  brief  elucidation  of  the  difference 
between  numbers  and  numerals.  A  numeral  is  a  sign,  a 
linguistic  expression,  something  which  one  can  write  down, 
erase,  copy,  and  so  on.  A  number,  on  the  other  hand,  is  some- 
thing which  a  numeral  names  or  designates,  and  which  can- 
not literally  be  written  down,  erased,  copied,  and  so  on.  Thus, 
we  say  that  10  is  the  number  of  our  fingers,  and,  in  making 
this  statement,  we  are  attributing  a  certain  property  to  the 
class  of  our  fingers;  but  it  would  evidently  be  absurd  to  say 
that  this  property  is  a  numeral.  Again,  the  number  10  is 
named  by  the  Arabic  numeral  '10',  as  well  as  by  the  Roman 
letter  'X';  these  names  are  different,  though  they  name  the 
same  number.  In  short,  when  we  make  a  substitution  for  a 
numerical  variable  (which  is  a  letter  or  sign)  we  are  putting 
one  sign  in  place  of  another  sign.  We  cannot  literally  sub- 
stitute a  number  for  a  sign,  because  a  number  is  a  property  of 
classes  (and  is  sometimes  said  to  be  a  concept),  not  something 
we  can  put  on  paper.  It  follows  that,  in  substituting  for  a  nu- 
merical variable,  we  can  substitute  only  a  numeral  (or  some 
other  numerical  expression,  such  as  'sO'  or  '7  +  5'),  and  not  a 
number.  This  explains  why,  in  the  above  meta-mathematical 
characterization,  we  state  that  we  are  substituting  for  the 
variable  the  numeral  for  (the  number)  y,  rather  than  the 
number  y  itself. 

The  reader  may  wonder  what  number  is  designated  by 
'sub  (y,  13,  y)'  if  the  formula  whose  Godel  number  is  y  does  not 
happen  to  contain  the  variable  with  Godel  number  13 — that 
is,  if  the  formula  does  not  contain  the  variable  y'.  Thus, 
sub  (243,000,000,  13,  243,000,000)  is  the  Godel  number  of  the 
formula  obtained  from  the  formula  with  Godel  number 
243,000,000  by  substituting  for  the  variable  'y'  the  numeral 
'243,000,000'.  But  if  the  reader  consults  Table  4,  he  will  find 
that  243,000,000  is  the  Godel  number  of  the  formula  '0  =  0', 


84     Godel's  Proof 


which  does  not  contain  the  variable  'y  What,  then,  is  the 
formula  that  is  obtained  from  '0  =  0'  by  substituting  for 
the  variable  'y'  the  numeral  for  the  number  243,000,000  The 
simple  answer  is  that,  since  '0  =  0'  does  not  contain  this  vari- 
able, no  substitution  can  be  made — or,  what  amounts  to  the 
same  thing,  that  the  formula  obtained  from  '0  =  0'  is  this  very 
same  formula.  Accordingly,  the  number  designated  by 
'sub  (243,000,000,  13,  243,000,000)'  is  243,000,000. 

The  reader  may  also  be  puzzled  as  to  whether  'sub  (y,  13,  y)' 
is  a  formula  within  the  arithmetical  system  in  the  sense  that, 
for  example,  '(3x)(x  =  sy)',  '0  =  0',  and  'Dem  (x,  z) '  are  for- 
mulas. The  answer  is  no,  for  the  following  reason.  The  ex- 
pression '0  =  0'  is  called  a  formula,  because  it  asserts  a  relation 
between  two  numbers  and  is  thus  capable  of  having  truth  or 
falsity  significantly  attributed  to  it.  Similarly,  when  definite 
numerals  are  substituted  for  the  variables  in  'Dem  (x,  z)  this 
expression  formulates  a  relation  between  two  numbers,  and 
so  becomes  a  statement  that  is  either  true  or  false.  The  same 
holds  for  (3x)(x  =  sy)'.  On  the  other  hand,  even  when  a 
definite  numeral  is  substituted  for  'y'  in  'sub  (y,  13,  y)  the  re- 
sulting expression  does  not  assert  anything  and  therefore  can- 
not be  true  or  false.  It  merely  designates  or  names  a  number, 
by  describing  it  as  a  certain  function  of  other  numbers.  The 
difference  between  a  formula  (which  is  in  effect  a  statement 
about  numbers,  and  so  is  either  true  or  false)  and  a  name- 
function  (which  is  in  effect  a  name  that  identifies  a  number, 
and  so  is  neither  true  nor  false)  may  be  clarified  by  some 
further  illustrations.  '5  =  3'  is  a  formula  which,  though  false, 
declares  that  the  two  numbers  5  and  3  are  equal;  '52  =  42  +  32' 
is  also  a  formula  which  asserts  that  a  definite  relation  holds 
between  the  three  numbers  5,  4,  and  3;  and,  more  generally, 
'y  =  £(#)'  is  a  formula  which  asserts  that  a  certain  relation 
holds  between  the  unspecified  numbers  x  and  y.  On  the  other 
hand,  '2  +  3'  expresses  a  function  of  the  two  numbers  2  and 
3,  and  so  names  a  certain  number  (in  fact,  the  number  5);  it 
is  not  a  formula,  for  it  clearly  would  be  nonsensical  to  ask 
whether  '2  +  3'  is  true  or  false.    '(7  x  5)  +  8'  expresses  an- 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument     85 

C    The  heart  of  Goce's  argument 
At  last  we  are  equipped  to  follow  in  outline  Godel's 
main  argument.   We  shall  begin  by  enumerating  the 
steps  in  a  general  way,  so  that  the  reader  can  get  a 
bird's-eye  view  of  the  sequence. 

Godel  showed  (i)  how  to  construct  an  arithmetical 
formula  G  that  represents  the  meta-mathematical 
statement  'The  formula  G  is  not  demonstrable'.  This 
formula  G  thus  ostensibly  says  of  itself  that  it  is  not 
demonstrable.  Up  to  a  point,  G  is  constructed  analo- 
gously to  the  Richard  Paradox.  In  that  Paradox,  the 
expression  'Richardian'  is  associated  with  a  certain 
number  n,  and  the  sentence  'n  is  Richardian'  is  con- 
structed. In  Godel's  argument,  the  formula  G  is  also 
associated  with  a  certain  number  h,  and  is  so  con- 
structed that  it  corresponds  to  the  statement  'The  for- 
mula with  the  associated  number  h  is  not  demonstra- 
ble'. But  (ii)  Godel  also  showed  that  G  is  demon- 
strable if,  and  only  if,  its  formal  negation  ^  G  is  de- 
monstrable. This  step  in  the  argument  is  again  analo- 
gous to  a  step  in  the  Richard  Paradox,  in  which  it  is 
proved  that  n  is  Richardian  if,  and  only  if,  n  is  not 


other  function  of  the  three  numbers  5,  7,  and  8,  and  designates 
the  number  43.  And,  more  generally,  'f(x)'  expresses  a  func- 
tion of  x,  and  identifies  a  certain  number  when  a  definite 
numeral  is  substituted  for  V  and  when  a  definite  meaning  is 
given  to  the  function-sign  T.  In  short,  while  'Dem  (x,  z)'  is  a 
formula  because  it  has  the  form  of  a  statement  about  num- 
bers, 'sub  (y,  13,  y)'  is  not  a  formula  because  it  has  only  the 
form  of  a  name  for  numbers. 


86     Code  Proof 

Richardian.  However,  if  a  formula  and  its  own  nega- 
tion are  both  formally  demonstrable,  the  arithmetical 
calculus  is  not  consistent.  Accordingly,  if  the  calculus 
is  consistent,  neither  G  nor  ~  G  is  formally  derivable 
from  the  axioms  of  arithmetic.  Therefore,  if  arith- 
metic is  consistent,  G  is  a  formally  undecidable  for- 
mula. Godel  then  proved  (iii)  that,  though  G  is  not 
formally  demonstrable,  it  nevertheless  is  a  true  arith- 
metical formula.  It  is  true  in  the  sense  that  it  asserts 
that  every  integer  possesses  a  certain  arithmetical  prop- 
erty, which  can  be  exactly  defined  and  is  exhibited  by 
whatever  integer  is  examined,  (iv)  Since  G  is  both 
true  and  formally  undecidable,  the  axioms  of  arith- 
metic are  incomplete.  In  other  words,  we  cannot  de- 
duce all  arithmetical  truths  from  the  axioms.  More- 
over, Godel  established  that  arithmetic  is  essentially 
incomplete  even  if  additional  axioms  were  assumed  so 
that  the  true  formula  G  could  be  formally  derived  from 
the  augmented  set,  another  true  but  formally  unde- 
cidable formula  could  be  constructed,  (v)  Next,  Godel 
described  how  to  construct  an  arithmetical  formula  A 
that  represents  the  meta-mathematical  statement 
'Arithmetic  is  consistent';  and  he  proved  that  the  for- 
mula 'A  D  G'  is  formally  demonstrable.  Finally,  he 
showed  that  the  formula  A  is  not  demonstrable.  From 
this  it  follows  that  the  consistency  of  arithmetic  cannot 
be  established  by  an  argument  that  can  be  represented 
in  the  formal  arithmetical  calculus. 

Now,  to  give  the  substance  of  the  argument  more 
fully 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument     87 

(i)  The  formula  '~  Dem  (x,  z)'  has  already  been 
identified.  It  represents  within  formalized  arithmetic 
the  meta-mathematical  statement  'The  sequence  of 
formulas  with  the  Godel  number  x  is  not  a  proof  for 
the  formula  with  the  Godel  number  z  .  The  prefix 
'(x)'  is  now  introduced  into  the  Dem  formula.  This 
prefix  performs  the  same  function  in  the  formalized 
system  as  does  the  English  phrase  Tor  every  x  On 
attaching  this  prefix,  we  have  a  new  formula  '(%) 
~  Dem  (x,  z)  which  represents  within  arithmetic  the 
meta-mathematical  statement  Tor  every  x,  the  se- 
quence of  formulas  with  Godel  number  x  is  not  a 
proof  for  the  formula  with  Godel  number  z  The  new 
formula  is  therefore  the  formal  paraphrase  (strictly 
speaking,  it  is  the  unique  representative),  within  the 
calculus,  of  the  meta-mathematical  statement  'The 
formula  with  Godel  number  z  is  not  demonstrable' — 
or,  to  put  it  another  way,  'No  proof  can  be  adduced  for 
the  formula  with  Godel  number  z 

What  Godel  showed  is  that  a  certain  special  case  of 
this  formula  is  not  formally  demonstrable.  To  con- 
struct this  special  case,  begin  with  the  formula  dis- 
played as  line  (1) 

(1)  (x)  ~  Dem  (x,  sub  (y,  13,  y)) 

This  formula  belongs  to  the  arithmetical  calculus,  but 
it  represents  a  meta-mathematical  statement.  The 
question  is,  which  one  The  reader  should  first  recall 
that  the  expression  'sub  (y,  13,  y)'  designates  a  num- 
ber. This  number  is  the  Godel  number  of  the  formula 
obtained  from  the  formula  with  Godel  number  y,  by 


88     Godel's  Proof 

substituting  for  the  variable  with  Godel  number  13  the 
numeral  for  y.25  It  will  then  be  evident  that  the  for- 
mula of  line  (1)  represents  the  meta-mathematical 
statement  'The  formula  with  Godel  number  sub  (y, 
13,  y)  is  not  demonstrable'.26 


25  It  is  of  utmost  importance  to  recognize  that  'sub  (y,  13,  y) 
though  it  is  an  expression  in  formalized  arithmetic,  is  not  a 
formula  but  rather  a  name-function  for  identifying  a  number 
(see  explanatory  footnote  24).  The  number  so  identified,  how- 
ever, is  the  Godel  number  of  a  formula — of  the  formula  ob- 
tained from  the  formula  with  Godel  number  y,  by  substituting 
for  the  variable  y  the  numeral  for  y. 

26  This  statement  can  be  expanded  still  further  to  read 
'The  formula  [whose  Godel  number  is  the  number  of  the 
formula]  obtained  from  the  formula  with  Godel  number  y, 
by  substituting  for  the  variable  with  Godel  number  13  the 
numeral  for  y,  is  not  demonstrable'. 

The  reader  may  be  puzzled  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  meta- 
mathematical  statement  'The  formula  with  Godel  number 
sub  (y,  13,  y)  is  not  demonstrable',  the  expression  'sub  (y,  13,  y)' 
does  not  appear  within  quotation  marks,  although  it  has  been 
repeatedly  stated  in  the  text  that  'sub  (y,  13,  ))'  is  an  expres- 
sion. The  point  involved  hinges  once  more  on  the  distinction 
between  using  an  expression  to  talk  about  what  the  expression 
designates  (in  which  case  the  expression  is  not  placed  within 
quotation  marks)  and  talking  about  the  expression  itself  (in 
which  case  we  must  use  a  name  for  the  expression  and,  in  con- 
formity with  the  convention  for  constructing  such  names,  must 
place  the  expression  within  quotation  marks).  An  example 
will  help.  '7  -f  5'  is  an  expression  which  designates  a  number; 
on  the  other  hand,  7  +  5  is  a  number,  and  not  an  expression. 
Similarly,  'sub  (243,000,000,  13,  243,000,000)'  is  an  expression 
which  designates  the  Godel  number  of  a  formula  (see  Table 
4);  but  sub  (243,000,000,  13,  243,000,000)  is  the  Godel  number 
of  a  formula,  and  is  not  an  expression. 


The  Heart  of  Godel' s  Argument     89 

But,  since  the  formula  of  line  (1)  belongs  to  the 
arithmetical  calculus,  it  has  a  Godel  number  that  can 
actually  be  calculated.  Suppose  the  number  to  be  n. 
We  now  substitute  for  the  variable  with  Godel  num- 
ber 13  (i.e.,  for  the  variable  'y')  in  the  formula  of  line 
(1)  the  numeral  for  n.  A  new  formula  is  then  ob- 
tained, which  we  shall  call  G'  (after  Godel)  and  dis- 
play under  that  label 

(G)  (x)  ^  Dem  {x,  sub  (n,  13,  ri)) 

Formula  G  is  the  special  case  we  promised  to  con- 
struct. 

Now,  this  formula  occurs  within  the  arithmetical 
calculus,  and  therefore  must  have  a  Godel  number. 
What  is  the  number  A  little  reflection  shows  that  it  is 
sub  (n,  13,  ri).  To  grasp  this,  we  must  recall  that 
sub  (w,  13,  ri)  is  the  Godel  number  of  the  formula 
that  is  obtained  from  the  formula  with  Godel  num- 
ber n  by  substituting  for  the  variable  with  Godel  num- 
ber 13  (i.e.,  for  the  variable  y')  the  numeral  for  n. 
But  the  formula  G  has  been  obtained  from  the  formula 
with  Godel  number  n  (i.e.,  from  the  formula  displayed 
on  line  (1))  by  substituting  for  the  variable  'y'  occur- 
ring in  it  the  numeral  for  n.  Hence  the  Godel  num- 
ber of  G  is  in  fact  sub  (n,  13,  ri). 

But  we  must  also  remember  that  the  formula  G  is 
the  mirror  image  within  the  arithmetical  calculus  of 
the  meta-mathematical  statement  'The  formula  with 
Godel  number  sub  (n,  13,  ri)  is  not  demonstrable'.  It 
follows  that  the  arithmetical  formula  '(x)  •  Dem  (x, 


90     Godel's  Proof 

sub  (n,  13,  n))'  represents  in  the  calculus  the  meta- 
mathematical  statement  'The  formula  x)  ~  Dem  (x, 
sub  (n,  13,  n)Y  is  not  demonstrable'.  In  a  sense,  there- 
fore, this  arithmetical  formula  G  can  be  construed  as 
asserting  of  itself  that  it  is  not  demonstrable. 

(ii)  We  come  to  the  next  step,  the  proof  that  G  is  not 
formally  demonstrable.  Godel's  demonstration  resem- 
bles the  development  of  the  Richard  Paradox,  but  stays 
clear  of  its  fallacious  reasoning.27  The  argument  is 
relatively  unencumbered.  It  proceeds  by  showing  that 
if  the  formula  G  were  demonstrable  then  its  formal 


27  It  may  be  useful  to  make  explicit  the  resemblance  as  well 
as  the  dissimilarity  of  the  present  argument  to  that  used  in 
the  Richard  Paradox.  The  main  point  to  observe  is  that  the 
formula  G  is  not  identical  with  the  meta-mathematical  state- 
ment with  which  it  is  associated,  but  only  represents  (or 
mirrors)  the  latter  within  the  arithmetical  calculus.  In  the 
Richard  Paradox  (as  explained  on  p.  63  above)  the  number  n 
is  the  number  associated  with  a  certain  meta-mathematical  ex- 
pression. In  the  Godel  construction,  the  number  n  is  as- 
sociated with  a  certain  arithmetical  formula  belonging  to  the 
formal  calculus,  though  this  arithmetical  formula  in  fact 
represents  a  meta-mathematical  statement.  (The  formula 
represents  this  statement,  because  the  meta-mathematics  of 
arithmetic  has  been  mapped  onto  arithmetic.)  In  developing 
the  Richard  Paradox,  the  question  is  asked  whether  the  num- 
ber n  possesses  the  meta-mathematical  property  of  being 
Richardian.  In  the  Godel  construction,  the  question  asked  is 
whether  the  number  sub  (n,  13,  n)  possesses  a  certain  arith- 
metical property — namely,  the  arithmetical  property  expressed 
by  the  formula  x)  ~  Dem  (x,  z)'.  There  is  therefore  no  con- 
fusion in  the  Godel  construction  between  statements  within 
arithmetic  and  statements  about  arithmetic,  such  as  occurs  in 
the  Richard  Paradox. 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument    91 

contradictory  (namely,  the  formula  '^  (x)  ^  Dem  (x, 
sub  (n,  13,  n)Y)  would  also  be  demonstrable;  and,  con- 
versely, that  if  the  formal  contradictory  of  G  were 
demonstrable  then  G  itself  would  also  be  demonstra- 
ble. Thus  we  have  G  is  demonstrable  if,  and  only  if, 
^  G  is  demonstrable.28   But  as  we  noted  earlier,  if  a 


28  This  is  not  what  Godel  actually  proved;  and  the  state- 
ment in  the  text,  an  adaptation  of  a  theorem  obtained  by 
J.  Barkley  Rosser  in  1936,  is  used  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  in 
exposition.  What  Godel  actually  showed  is  that  if  G  is 
demonstrable  then  ^  G  is  demonstrable  (so  that  arithmetic  is 
then  inconsistent);  and  if  ^  G  is  demonstrable  then  arith- 
metic is  co-inconsistent.  What  is  co-inconsistency  Let  T'  be 
some  arithmetical  predicate.  Then  arithmetic  would  be 
co-inconsistent  if  it  were  possible  to  demonstrate  both  the  for- 
mula '(3x)P(a;)'  (i.e.,  There  is  at  least  one  number  that  has 
the  property  P')  and  also  each  of  the  infinite  set  of  formulas 
~  P(0)',  '^  P(i)',  '—  P(2)  etc.  (i.e.,  '0  does  not  have  the 
property  P',  '1  does  not  have  the  property  P',  '2  does  not  have 
the  property  P',  and  so  on).  A  little  reflection  shows  that  if  a 
calculus  is  inconsistent  then  it  is  also  co-inconsistent;  but  the 
converse  does  not  necessarily  hold  a  system  may  be  co -incon- 
sistent without  being  inconsistent.  For  a  system  to  be  incon- 
sistent, both  '(3)P(x)'  and  '(x)  ^  P(x)'  must  be  demonstrable. 
However,  although  if  a  system  is  co-inconsistent  both  '(3x) 
P(x)'  and  each  of  the  infinite  set  of  formulas  '~  P(0)', 
~P(i)',  '^  P(2)',  etc.,  are  demonstrable,  the  formula  '(x)  ~ 
P(x)'  may  nevertheless  not  be  demonstrable,  so  that  the  system 
is  not  inconsistent. 

We  outline  the  first  part  of  Godel's  argument  that  if  G  is 
demonstrable  then  ^  G  is  demonstrable.  Suppose  the  formula 
G  were  demonstrable.  Then  there  must  be  a  sequence  of  for- 
mulas within  arithmetic  that  constitutes  a  proof  for  G.  Let 
the  Godel  number  of  this  proof  be  k.  Accordingly,  the  arith- 
metical relation  designated  by  'Dem  (x,  z)'  must  hold  between 


92     Godel's  Proof 

formula  and  its  formal  negation  can  both  be  derived 
from  a  set  of  axioms,  the  axioms  are  not  consistent. 
Whence,  if  the  axioms  of  the  formalized  system  of 
arithmetic  are  consistent,  neither  the  formula  G  nor 
its  negation  is  demonstrable.  In  short,  if  the  axioms 
are  consistent,  G  is  formally  undecidable — in  the  pre- 
cise technical  sense  that  neither  G  nor  its  contradictory 
can  be  formally  deduced  from  the  axioms. 

(iii)  This  conclusion  may  not  appear  at  first  sight  to 
be  of  capital  importance.  Why  is  it  so  remarkable,  it 
may  be  asked,  that  a  formula  can  be  constructed  within 
arithmetic  which  is  undecidable  There  is  a  surprise 
in  store  which  illuminates  the  profound  implications 
of  this  result.  For,  although  the  formula  G  is  unde- 
cidable if  the  axioms  of  the  system  are  consistent,  it 


k,  the  Godel  number  of  the  proof,  and  sub  in,  13,  ri),  the  Godel 
number  of  G,  which  is  to  say  that  'Dem  (k,  sub  (n,  13,  n))'  must 
be  a  true  arithmetical  formula.  However,  it  can  be  shown  that 
this  arithmetical  relation  is  of  such  type  that,  if  it  holds  be- 
tween a  definite  pair  of  numbers,  the  formula  that  expresses 
this  fact  is  demonstrable.  Consequently,  the  formula  'Dem  (k, 
sub  (n,  13,  ri))'  is  not  only  true,  but  also  formally  demonstrable; 
that  is,  the  formula  is  a  theorem.  But,  with  the  help  of  the 
Transformation  Rules  in  elementary  logic,  we  can  immedi- 
ately derive  from  this  theorem  the  formula  '-  (x)  ~  Dem  (x, 
sub  (n,  13,  ri))'.  We  have  therefore  shown  that  if  the  formula  G 
is  demonstrable  its  formal  negation  is  demonstrable.  It  fol- 
lows that  if  the  formal  system  is  consistent  the  formula  G  is 
not  demonstrable. 

A  somewhat  analogous  but  more  complicated  argument  is 
required  to  show  that  if  ~  G  is  demonstrable  then  G  is  also 
demonstrable.  We  shall  not  attempt  to  outline  it. 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument     93 

can  nevertheless  be  shown  by  meta-mathematical  rea- 
soning that  G  is  true.  That  is,  it  can  be  shown  that  G 
formulates  a  complex  but  definite  numerical  property 
which  necessarily  holds  of  all  integers — just  as  the  for- 
mula '(x)  ~  (x  +  3  =  2)'  (which,  when  it  is  inter- 
preted in  the  usual  way,  says  that  no  cardinal  number, 
when  added  to  3,  yields  a  sum  equal  to  2)  expresses  an- 
other, likewise  necessary  (though  much  simpler)  prop- 
erty of  all  integers.  The  reasoning  that  validates  the 
truth  of  the  undecidable  formula  G  is  straightforward. 
First,  on  the  assumption  that  arithmetic  is  consistent, 
the  meta-mathematical  statement  'The  formula  '(x) 
~  Dem  (x,  sub  (n,  13,  n))'  is  not  demonstrable'  has 
been  proven  true.  Second,  this  statement  is  repre- 
sented within  arithmetic  by  the  very  formula  men- 
tioned in  the  statement.  Third,  we  recall  that  meta- 
mathematical  statements  have  been  mapped  onto  the 
arithmetical  formalism  in  such  a  way  that  true  meta- 
mathematical  statements  correspond  to  true  arithmeti- 
cal formulas.  (Indeed,  the  setting  up  of  such  a  corre- 
spondence is  the  raison  d'etre  of  the  mapping;  as,  for 
example,  in  analytic  geometry  where,  by  virtue  of  this 
process,  true  geometric  statements  always  correspond 
to  true  algebraic  statements.)  It  follows  that  the  for- 
mula G,  which  corresponds  to  a  true  meta-mathemati- 
cal statement,  must  be  true.  It  should  be  noted,  how- 
ever, that  we  have  established  an  arithmetical  truth, 
not  by  deducing  it  formally  from  the  axioms  of  arith- 
metic, but  by  a  meta-mathematical  argument. 

(iv)    We  now  remind  the  reader  of  the  notion  of 


g4     Godel's  Proof 

completeness  introduced  in  the  discussion  of  the 
sentential  calculus.  It  was  explained  that  the  axioms  of 
a  deductive  system  are  complete  if  every  true  state- 
ment that  can  be  expressed  in  the  system  is  formally 
deducible  from  the  axioms.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  that 
is,  if  not  every  true  statement  expressible  in  the  system 
is  deducible,  the  axioms  are  incomplete.  But,  since 
we  have  just  established  that  G  is  a  true  formula  of 
arithmetic  not  formally  deducible  within  it,  it  follows 
that  the  axioms  of  arithmetic  are  incomplete — on  the 
hypothesis,  of  course,  that  they  are  consistent.  More- 
over, they  are  essentially  incomplete  even  if  G  were 
added  as  a  further  axiom,  the  augmented  set  would 
still  not  suffice  to  yield  formally  all  arithmetical  truths. 
For,  if  the  initial  axioms  were  augmented  in  the  sug- 
gested manner,  another  true  but  undecidable  arith- 
metical formula  could  be  constructed  in  the  enlarged 
system;  such  a  formula  could  be  constructed  merely  by 
repeating  in  the  new  system  the  procedure  used  origi- 
nally for  specifying  a  true  but  undecidable  formula  in 
the  initial  system.  This  remarkable  conclusion  holds, 
no  matter  how  often  the  initial  system  is  enlarged.  We 
are  thus  compelled  to  recognize  a  fundamental  limita- 
tion in  the  power  of  the  axiomatic  method.  Against 
previous  assumptions,  the  vast  continent  of  arithmeti- 
cal truth  cannot  be  brought  into  systematic  order  by 
laying  down  once  for  all  a  set  of  axioms  from  which 
every  true  arithmetical  statement  can  be  formally  de- 
rived. 

(v)  We  come  to  the  coda  of  Godel's  amazing  intel- 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument    95 

lectual  symphony.  The  steps  have  been  traced  by 
which  he  grounded  the  meta-mathematical  statement 
'If  arithmetic  is  consistent,  it  is  incomplete'.  But  it  can 
also  be  shown  that  this  conditional  statement  taken  as 
a  whole  is  represented  by  a  demonstrable  formula 
within  formalized  arithmetic. 

This  crucial  formula  can  be  easily  constructed.  As 
we  explained  in  Section  V,  the  meta-mathematical 
statement  'Arithmetic  is  consistent'  is  equivalent  to  the 
statement  'There  is  at  least  one  formula  of  arithmetic 
that  is  not  demonstrable'.  The  latter  is  represented  in 
the  formal  calculus  by  the  following  formula,  which  we 
shall  call  'A' 

(A)  Oty)  ()  ~  Dem  (x  y) 

In  words,  this  says  'There  is  at  least  one  number  y  such 
that,  for  every  number  x,  x  does  not  stand  in  the  rela- 
tion Dem  to  y  Interpreted  meta-mathematically,  the 
formula  asserts  'There  is  at  least  one  formula  of  arith- 
metic for  which  no  sequence  of  formulas  constitutes  a 
proof.  The  formula  A  therefore  represents  the  ante- 
cedent clause  of  the  meta-mathematical  statement  'If 
arithmetic  is  consistent,  it  is  incomplete'.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  consequent  clause  in  this  statement — 
namely,  'It  [arithmetic]  is  incomplete' — follows  directly 
from  'There  is  a  true  arithmetical  statement  that  is  not 
formally  demonstrable  in  arithmetic';  and  the  latter, 
as  the  reader  will  recognize,  is  represented  in  the  arith- 
metical calculus  by  an  old  friend,  the  formula  G.  Ac- 
cordingly,   the   conditional   meta-mathematical   state- 


96     Godel's  Proof 

ment  'If  arithmetic  is  consistent,  it  is  incomplete'  is 
represented  by  the  formula 

(3}')(#)  ~  Dem  (x,  y)  3  (x)  ~  Dem  (x,  sub  (n,  13,  n)) 

which,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  can  be  symbolized  by 
'A  3  G  (This  formula  can  be  proved  formally  de- 
monstrable, but  we  shall  not  in  these  pages  undertake 
the  task.) 

We  now  show  that  the  formula  A  is  not  demonstra- 
ble. For  suppose  it  were.  Then,  since  A  D  G  is  de- 
monstrable, by  use  of  the  Rule  of  Detachment  the  for- 
mula G  would  be  demonstrable.  But,  unless  the  calcu- 
lus is  inconsistent,  G  is  formally  undecidable,  that  is, 
not  demonstrable.  Thus  if  arithmetic  is  consistent,  the 
formula  A  is  not  demonstrable. 

What  does  this  signify  The  formula  A  represents 
the  meta-mathematical  statement  'Arithmetic  is  con- 
sistent'. If,  therefore,  this  statement  could  be  estab- 
lished by  any  argument  that  can  be  mapped  onto  a  se- 
quence of  formulas  which  constitutes  a  proof  in  the 
arithmetical  calculus,  the  formula  A  would  itself  be 
demonstrable.  But  this,  as  we  have  just  seen,  is  im- 
possible, if  arithmetic  is  consistent.  The  grand  final 
step  is  before  us  we  must  conclude  that  if  arithmetic 
is  consistent  its  consistency  cannot  be  established  by 
any  meta-mathematical  reasoning  that  can  be  repre- 
sented within  the  formalism  of  arithmetic! 

This  imposing  result  of  Godel's  analysis  should  not 
be  misunderstood  it  does  not  exclude  a  meta-mathe- 
matical proof  of  the  consistency  of  arithmetic.  What  it 
excludes  is  a  proof  of  consistency  that  can  be  mirrored 


The  Heart  of  Godel's  Argument     97 

by  the  formal  deductions  of  arithmetic.29  Meta-mathe- 
matical  proofs  of  the  consistency  of  arithmetic  have,  in 
fact,  been  constructed,  notably  by  Gerhard  Gentzen,  a 
member  of  the  Hilbert  school,  in  1936,  and  by  others 
since  then.30  These  proofs  are  of  great  logical  signifi- 
cance, among  other  reasons  because  they  propose  new 
forms  of  meta-mathematical  constructions,  and  because 
they  thereby  help  make  clear  how  the  class  of  rules  of 
inference  needs  to  be  enlarged  if  the  consistency  of 
arithmetic  is  to  be  established.  But  these  proofs  can- 
not be  represented  within  the  arithmetical  calculus; 
and,  since  they  are  not  finitistic,  they  do  not  achieve 
the  proclaimed  objectives  of  Hilbert's  original  pro- 
gram. 


29  The  reader  may  be  helped  on  this  point  by  the  reminder 
that,  similarly,  the  proof  that  it  is  impossible  to  trisect  an 
arbitrary  angle  with  compass  and  straight-edge  does  not  mean 
that  an  angle  cannot  be  trisected  by  any  means  whatever.  On 
the  contrary,  an  arbitrary  angle  can  be  trisected  if,  for  ex- 
ample, in  addition  to  the  use  of  compass  and  straight-edge,  one 
is  permitted  to  employ  a  fixed  distance  marked  on  the  straight- 
edge. 

30  Gentzen's  proof  depends  on  arranging  all  the  demonstra- 
tions of  arithmetic  in  a  linear  order  according  to  their  degree 
of  simplicity.  The  arrangement  turns  out  to  have  a  pattern 
that  is  of  a  certain  transfinite  ordinal  type.  (The  theory  of 
transfinite  ordinal  numbers  was  created  by  the  German 
mathematician  Georg  Cantor  in  the  nineteenth  century.)  The 
proof  of  consistency  is  obtained  by  applying  to  this  linear 
order  a  rule  of  inference  called  the  principle  of  transfinite  in- 
duction. Gentzen's  argument  cannot  be  mapped  onto  the 
formalism  of  arithmetic.  Moreover,  although  most  students 
do  not  question  the  cogency  of  the  proof,  it  is  not  finitistic  in 
the  sense  of  Hilbert's  original  stipulations  for  an  absolute 
proof  of  consistency. 


VIII 


Concluding  Reflections 

The  import  of  Godel's  conclusions  is  far-reaching, 
though  it  has  not  yet  been  fully  fathomed.  These  con- 
clusions show  that  the  prospect  of  finding  for  every 
deductive  system  (and,  in  particular,  for  a  system  in 
which  the  whole  of  arithmetic  can  be  expressed)  an 
absolute  proof  of  consistency  that  satisfies  the  finitistic 
requirements  of  Hilbert's  proposal,  though  not  logi- 
cally impossible,  is  most  unlikely.31  They  show  also 
that  there  is  an  endless  number  of  true  arithmetical 
statements  which  cannot  be  formally  deduced  from  any 
given  set  of  axioms  by  a  closed  set  of  rules  of  inference. 
It  follows  that  an  axiomatic  approach  to  number  the- 


31  The  possibility  of  constructing  a  finitistic  absolute  proof 
of  consistency  for  arithmetic  is  not  excluded  by  Godel's  results. 
Godel  showed  that  no  such  proof  is  possible  that  can  be  repre- 
sented within  arithmetic.  His  argument  does  not  eliminate 
the  possibility  of  strictly  finitistic  proofs  that  cannot  be  rep- 
resented within  arithmetic.  But  no  one  today  appears  to  have 
a  clear  idea  of  what  a  finitistic  proof  would  be  like  that  is  not 
capable  of  formulation  within  arithmetic. 

98 


Concluding  Reflections    99 

ory,  for  example,  cannot  exhaust  the  domain  of  arith- 
metical truth.  It  follows,  also,  that  what  we  under- 
stand by  the  process  of  mathematical  proof  does  not 
coincide  with  the  exploitation  of  a  formalized  axio- 
matic method.  A  formalized  axiomatic  procedure  is 
based  on  an  initially  determined  and  fixed  set  of  axi- 
oms and  transformation  rules.  As  Godel's  own  argu- 
ments show,  no  antecedent  limits  can  be  placed  on  the 
inventiveness  of  mathematicians  in  devising  new  rules 
of  proof.  Consequently,  no  final  account  can  be  given 
of  the  precise  logical  form  of  valid  mathematical  dem- 
onstrations. In  the  light  of  these  circumstances, 
whether  an  all-inclusive  definition  of  mathematical  or 
logical  truth  can  be  devised,  and  whether,  as  Godel 
himself  appears  to  believe,  only  a  thoroughgoing  phil- 
osophical realism  of  the  ancient  Platonic  type  can 
supply  an  adequate  definition,  are  problems  still  under 
debate  and  too  difficult  for  further  consideration 
here.32 


32  Platonic  realism  takes  the  view  that  mathematics  does  not 
create  or  invent  its  objects,  but  discovers  them  as  Columbus 
discovered  America.  Now,  if  this  is  true,  the  objects  must  in 
some  sense  exist  prior  to  their  discovery.  According  to 
Platonic  doctrine,  the  objects  of  mathematical  study  are  not 
found  in  the  spatio-temporal  order.  They  are  disembodied 
eternal  Forms  or  Archetypes,  which  dwell  in  a  distinctive 
realm  accessible  only  to  the  intellect.  On  this  view,  the  tri- 
angular or  circular  shapes  of  physical  bodies  that  can  be  per- 
ceived by  the  senses  are  not  the  proper  objects  of  mathematics. 
These  shapes  are  merely  imperfect  embodiments  of  an  indi- 
visible perfect  Triangle  or  perfect  Circle,  which  is  un- 
created, is  never  fully  manifested  by  material  things,  and  can 


ioo     Godel's  Proof 

Godel's  conclusions  bear  on  the  question  whether  a 
calculating  machine  can  be  constructed  that  would 
match  the  human  brain  in  mathematical  intelligence. 
Today's  calculating  machines  have  a  fixed  set  of  direc- 
tives built  into  them;  these  directives  correspond  to 
the  fixed  rules  of  inference  of  formalized  axiomatic 
procedure.  The  machines  thus  supply  answers  to  prob- 
lems by  operating  in  a  step-by-step  manner,  each  step 
being  controlled  by  the  built-in  directives.  But,  as 
Godel  showed  in  his  incompleteness  theorem,  there  are 
innumerable  problems  in  elementary  number  theory 
that  fall  outside  the  scope  of  a  fixed  axiomatic  method, 
and  that  such  engines  are  incapable  of  answering,  how- 
ever intricate  and  ingenious  their  built-in  mechanisms 
may  be  and  however  rapid  their  operations.  Given  a 
definite  problem,  a  machine  of  this  type  might  be  built 
for  solving  it;  but  no  one  such  machine  can  be  built  for 
solving  every  problem.  The  human  brain  may,  to  be 
sure,  have  built-in  limitations  of  its  own,  and  there 
may  be  mathematical  problems  it  is  incapable  of  solv- 
ing. But,  even  so,  the  brain  appears  to  embody  a  struc- 
ture of  rules  of  operation  which  is  far  more  powerful 


be  grasped  solely  by  the  exploring  mind  of  the  mathematician. 
Godel  appears  to  hold  a  similar  view  when  he  says,  Classes 
and  concepts  may  ...  be  conceived  as  real  objects  .  .  .  existing 
independently  of  our  definitions  and  constructions.  It  seems 
to  me  that  the  assumption  of  such  objects  is  quite  as  legitimate 
as  the  assumption  of  physical  bodies  and  there  is  quite  as  much 
reason  to  believe  in  their  existence  (Kurt  Godel,  Russell's 
Mathematical  Logic,  in  The  Philosophy  of  Bertrand  Russell 
(ed.  Paul  A.  Schilpp,  Evanston  and  Chicago,  1944),  p.  137). 


Concluding  Reflections     101 

than  the  structure  of  currently  conceived  artificial  ma- 
chines. There  is  no  immediate  prospect  of  replacing 
the  human  mind  by  robots. 

Godel's  proof  should  not  be  construed  as  an  invita- 
tion to  despair  or  as  an  excuse  for  mystery-mongering. 
The  discovery  that  there  are  arithmetical  truths  which 
cannot  be  demonstrated  formally  does  not  mean  that 
there  are  truths  which  are  forever  incapable  of  be- 
coming known,  or  that  a  mystic  intuition  (radically 
different  in  kind  and  authority  from  what  is  generally 
operative  in  intellectual  advances)  must  replace  cogent 
proof.  It  does  not  mean,  as  a  recent  writer  claims,  that 
there  are  ineluctable  limits  to  human  reason.  It 
does  mean  that  the  resources  of  the  human  intellect 
have  not  been,  and  cannot  be,  fully  formalized,  and 
that  new  principles  of  demonstration  forever  await  in- 
vention and  discovery.  We  have  seen  that  mathemati- 
cal propositions  which  cannot  be  established  by  formal 
deduction  from  a  given  set  of  axioms  may,  neverthe- 
less, be  established  by  informal  meta-mathematical 
reasoning.  It  would  be  irresponsible  to  claim  that 
these  formally  indemonstrable  truths  established  by 
meta-mathematical  arguments  are  based  on  nothing 
better  than  bare  appeals  to  intuition. 

Nor  do  the  inherent  limitations  of  calculating  ma- 
chines imply  that  we  cannot  hope  to  explain  living 
matter  and  human  reason  in  physical  and  chemical 
terms.  The  possibility  of  such  explanations  is  neither 
precluded  nor  affirmed  by  Godel's  incompleteness 
theorem.    The  theorem  does  indicate  that  the  struc- 


102     Godel's  Proof 

ture  and  power  of  the  human  mind  are  far  more  com- 
plex and  subtle  than  any  non-living  machine  yet  en- 
visaged. Godel's  own  work  is  a  remarkable  example 
of  such  complexity  and  subtlety.  It  is  an  occasion,  not 
for  dejection,  but  for  a  renewed  appreciation  of  the 
powers  of  creative  reason. 


Appendix 

Notes 

1 .  (page  1 1)  It  was  not  until  1899  that  the  arithmetic 
of  cardinal  numbers  was  axiomatized,  by  the  Italian 
mathematician  Giuseppe  Peano.  His  axioms  are  five 
in  number.  They  are  formulated  with  the  help  of 
three  undefined  terms,  acquaintance  with  the  latter 
being  assumed.  The  terms  are  'number',  'zero',  and 
'immediate  successor  of.  Peano's  axioms  can  be  stated 
as  follows 

1.  Zero  is  a  number. 

2.  The  immediate  successor  of  a  number 
is  a  number. 

3.  Zero  is  not  the  immediate  successor  of  a 
number. 

4.  No  two  numbers  have  the  same  immedi- 
ate successor. 

5.  Any  property  belonging  to  zero,  and 
also  to  the  immediate  successor  of  every  num- 
ber that  has  the  property,  belongs  to  all  num- 
bers. 

The  last  axiom  formulates  what  is  often  called  the 
' 'principle  of  mathematical  induction' 

103 


104    Appendix 

2.  (page  39)  The  reader  may  be  interested  in  seeing 
a  fuller  account  than  the  text  provides  of  the  logical 
theorems  and  rules  of  inference  tacitly  employed  even 
in  elementary  mathematical  demonstrations.  We  shall 
first  analyze  the  reasoning  that  yields  line  6  in  Euclid's 
proof,  from  lines  3,  4,  and  5. 

We  designate  the  letters  'p  (q  and  V  as  sentential 
variables,  because  sentences  may  be  substituted  for 
them.  Also,  to  economize  space,  we  write  conditional 
statements  of  the  form  'if  p  then  q  as  lp  3  q  and  we 
call  the  expression  to  the  left  of  the  horseshoe  sign  '  3  ' 
the  antecedent,  and  the  expression  to  the  right  of  it 
the  consequent.  Similarly,  we  write  'p  V  q  as  short 
for  the  alternative  form  'either  p  or  q  . 

There  is  a  theorem  in  elementary  logic  which  reads 

(P  =  r)  3  [(q  Or)D  ((p  V  q)  D  r)} 

It  can  be  shown  that  this  formulates  a  necessary  truth. 
The  reader  will  recognize  that  this  formula  states  more 
compactly  what  is  conveyed  by  the  following  much 
longer  statement 

If  (if  p  then  r),  then  [if  (if  q  then  r)  then  (if  (either  p 

or  q)  then  r)] 

As  pointed  out  in  the  text,  there  is  a  rule  of  inference 
in  logic  called  the  Rule  of  Substitution  for  Sentential 
Variables.  According  to  this  Rule,  a  sentence  S2  fol- 
lows logically  from  a  sentence  Si  which  contains  sen- 
tential variables,  if  the  former  is  obtained  from  the 
latter  by  uniformly  substituting  any  sentences  for  the 
variables.    If  we  apply  this  rule  to  the  theorem  just 


Notes     105 

mentioned,  substituting  'y  is  prime'  for  'p'f  'y  is  com- 
posite' for  'q,  and  'x  is  not  the  greatest  prime'  for  V, 
we  obtain  the  following 

(y  is  prime  3  %  is  not  the  greatest  prime) 

D  [()  is  composite  D  x  is  not  the  greatest  prime) 

3  (()  is  prime  V  y  is  composite)  3  x  is  not  the 

greatest  prime)] 

The  reader  will  readily  note  that  the  conditional 
sentence  within  the  first  pair  of  parentheses  (it  occurs 
on  the  first  line  of  this  instance  of  the  theorem)  simply 
duplicates  line  3  of  Euclid's  proof.  Similarly,  the  con- 
ditional sentence  within  the  first  pair  of  parentheses  in- 
side the  square  brackets  (it  occurs  as  the  second  line  of 
the  instance  of  the  theorem)  duplicates  line  4  of  the 
proof.  Also,  the  alternative  sentence  inside  the  square 
brackets  duplicates  line  5  of  the  proof. 

We  now  make  use  of  another  rule  of  inference 
known  as  the  Rule  of  Detachment  (or  Modus 
Ponens).  This  rule  permits  us  to  infer  a  sentence  S2 
from  two  other  sentences,  one  of  which  is  Si  and  the 
other,  Si  3  S2.  We  apply  this  Rule  three  times  first, 
using  line  3  of  Euclid's  proof  and  the  above  instance 
of  the  logical  theorem;  next,  the  result  obtained  by 
this  application  and  line  4  of  the  proof;  and,  finally, 
this  latest  result  of  the  application  and  line  5  of  the 
proof.  The  outcome  is  line  6  of  the  proof. 

The  derivation  of  line  6  from  lines  3,  4,  and  5  thus 
involves  the  tacit  use  of  two  rules  of  inference  and  a 
theorem  of  logic.  The  theorem  and  rules  belong  to  the 


106    Appendix 

elementary  part  of  logical  theory,  the  sentential  cal- 
culus. This  deals  with  the  logical  relations  between 
statements  compounded  out  of  other  statements  with 
the  help  of  sentential  connectives,  of  which  'D9  and 
'V  are  examples.  Another  such  connective  is  the  con- 
junction 'and',  for  which  the  dot  '  • '  is  used  as  a  short- 
hand form;  thus  the  conjunctive  statement  lp  and  q'  is 
written  as  'p  •  q.  The  sign  '^'  represents  the  nega- 
tive particle  'not';  thus  'not-  is  written  as  '^  p} '. 

Let  us  examine  the  transition  in  Euclid's  proof  from 
line  6  to  line  7.  This  step  cannot  be  analyzed  with  the 
help  of  the  sentential  calculus  alone.  A  rule  of  in- 
ference is  required  which  belongs  to  a  more  advanced 
part  of  logical  theory — namely,  that  which  takes  note 
of  the  internal  complexity  of  statements  embodying 
expressions  such  as  'all',  'every',  'some',  and  their 
synonyms.  These  are  traditionally  called  quantifiers, 
and  the  branch  of  logical  theory  that  discusses  their 
role  is  the  theory  of  quantification. 

It  is  necessary  to  explain  some  of  the  notation  em- 
ployed in  this  more  advanced  sector  of  logic,  as  a  pre- 
liminary to  analyzing  the  transition  in  question.  In 
addition  to  the  sentential  variables  for  which  sentences 
may  be  substituted,  we  must  consider  the  category  of 
individual  variables,  such  as  V,  'y',  'z',  etc.,  for 
which  the  names  of  individuals  can  be  substituted. 
Using  these  variables,  the  universal  statement  'All 
primes  greater  than  2  are  odd'  can  be  rendered  'For 
every  x,  if  x  is  a  prime  greater  than  2,  then  x  is  odd'. 
The  expression  'for  every  x'  is  called  the  universal 


Notes     107 

quantifier,  and  in  current  logical  notation  is  abbrevi- 
ated by  the  sign  '()'.  The  universal  statement  may 
therefore  be  written 

(x)(x  is  a  prime  greater  than  2  3  x  is  odd) 

Furthermore,  the  particular  (or  existential) 
statement  'Some  integers  are  composite'  can  be  ren- 
dered by  'There  is  at  least  one  x  such  that  x  is  an  in- 
teger and  x  is  composite'.  The  expression  'there  is  at 
least  one  x'  is  called  the  existential  quantifier,  and  is 
currently  abbreviated  by  the  notation  (3x)  The  ex- 
istential statement  just  mentioned  can  be  transcribed 

(lx)(x  is  an  integer  •  x  is  composite) 

It  is  now  to  be  observed  that  many  statements  im- 
plicitly use  more  than  one  quantifier,  so  that  in  ex- 
hibiting their  true  structure  several  quantifiers  must 
appear.  Before  illustrating  this  point,  let  us  adopt  cer- 
tain abbreviations  for  what  are  usually  called  predicate 
expressions  or,  more  simply,  predicates.  We  shall  use 
'Pr  (x)'  as  short  for  'x  is  a  prime  number';  and  'Gr  (x,  z)' 
as  short  for  'x  is  greater  than  zf.  Consider  the  state- 
ment 'x  is  the  greatest  prime'.  Its  meaning  can  be 
made  more  explicit  by  the  following  locution  'x  is  a 
prime,  and,  for  every  z  which  is  a  prime  but  different 
from  x,  x  is  greater  than  z.  With  the  help  of  our  vari- 
ous abbreviations,  the  statement  'x  is  the  greatest 
prime'  can  be  written 

Pr  ()  •  (z)  [(Pr  (z)  •  w  (x  =  z))  3  Gr  (x,  z)] 

Literally,  this  says  'x  is  a  prime  and,  for  every  z,  if  z  is 


108     Appendix 

a  prime  and  z  is  not  equal  to  x  then  x  is  greater  than  z'. 
We  recognize  in  the  symbolic  sequence  a  formal,  pain- 
fully explicit  rendition  of  the  content  of  line  1  in  Eu- 
clid's proof. 

Next,  consider  how  to  express  in  our  notation  the 
statement  lx  is  not  the  greatest  prime',  which  appears  as 
line  6  of  the  proof.   This  can  be  presented  as 

Pr(x)  •  (3z)[Pr(z)  •  Gr  (z,  )] 

Literally,  it  says  'x  is  a  prime  and  there  is  at  least  one  z 
such  that  z  is  a  prime  and  z  is  greater  than  x  . 

Finally,  the  conclusion  of  Euclid's  proof,  line  7, 
which  asserts  that  there  is  no  greatest  prime,  is  sym- 
bolically transcribed  by 

(x)  [Pr  ()  D  (3z)(Pr  (z)  •  Gr  (z,  x))] 

which  says  Tor  every  x}  if  x  is  a  prime,  there  is  at 
least  one  z  such  that  z  is  a  prime  and  z  is  greater  than  x  . 
The  reader  will  observe  that  Euclid's  conclusion  im- 
plicitly involves  the  use  of  more  than  one  quantifier. 

We  are  ready  to  discuss  the  step  from  Euclid's  line 
6  to  line  7.  There  is  a  theorem  in  logic  which  reads 
(p-q)(pD  q) 

or  when  translated,  If  both  p  and  q,  then  (if  p  then  q) 
Using  the  Rule  of  Substitution,  and  substituting 
Tr  ()'  for  '',  and  '(3z)  [Pr  (z)  •  Gr  (z,  x)]'  for  cq  we 
obtain 

(Pr  (x)  •  (3z)  [Pr  (z)  •  Gr  (x,  )])  3 
(Pr  (x)  3  (3z)  [Pr  (x)  •  Gr  (z,  )]) 
The  antecedent    (first  line)    of  this  instance  of  the 


Notes     109 

theorem  simply  duplicates  line  6  of  Euclid's  proof;  if 
we  apply  the  Rule  of  Detachment,  we  get 

(Pr  (x)  D  (3z)  [Pr  (z)  •  Gr  (z,  x)]) 

According  to  a  Rule  of  Inference  in  the  logical  theory 
of  quantification,  a  sentence  S2  having  the  form 
x)(  .  .  .  x  .  .  .  )'  can  always  be  inferred  from  a  sen- 
tence Si  having  the  form  '( .  .  .  x  .  .  . )'.  In  other  words, 
the  sentence  having  the  quantifier  '(x)'  as  a  prefix  can 
be  derived  from  the  sentence  that  does  not  contain  the 
prefix  but  is  like  the  former  in  other  respects.  Apply- 
ing this  rule  to  the  sentence  last  displayed,  we  have  line 
7  of  Euclid's  proof. 

The  moral  of  our  story  is  that  the  proof  of  Euclid's 
theorem  tacitly  involves  the  use  not  only  of  theorems 
and  rules  of  inference  belonging  to  the  sentential  cal- 
culus, but  also  of  a  rule  of  inference  in  the  theory  of 
quantification. 

3.  (page  54)  The  careful  reader  may  demur  at 
this  point.  His  reservations  may  run  something  like 
this.  The  property  of  being  a  tautology  has  been  de- 
fined in  notions  of  truth  and  falsity.  Yet  these  notions 
obviously  involve  a  reference  to  something  outside  the 
formal  calculus.  Therefore,  the  procedure  mentioned 
in  the  text  in  effect  offers  an  interpretation  of  the  cal- 
culus, by  supplying  a  model  for  the  system.  This  being 
so,  the  authors  have  not  done  what  they  promised, 
namely,  to  define  a  property  of  formulas  in  terms  of 
purely  structural  features  of  the  formulas  themselves. 


no    Appendix 

It  seems  that  the  difficulty  noted  in  Section  II  of  the 
text — that  proofs  of  consistency  which  are  based  on 
models,  and  which  argue  from  the  truth  of  axioms  to 
their  consistency,  merely  shift  the  problem — has  not, 
after  all,  been  successfully  outflanked.  Why  then  call 
the  proof  absolute  rather  than  relative 

The  objection  is  well  taken  when  directed  against 
the  exposition  in  the  text.  But  we  adopted  this  form 
so  as  not  to  overwhelm  the  reader  unaccustomed  to  a 
highly  abstract  presentation  resting  on  an  intuitively 
opaque  proof.  Because  more  venturesome  readers  may 
wish  to  be  exposed  to  the  real  thing,  to  see  an  un- 
prettified  definition  that  is  not  open  to  the  criticisms  in 
question,  we  shall  supply  it. 

Remember  that  a  formula  of  the  calculus  is  either 
one  of  the  letters  used  as  sentential  variables  (we  will 
call  such  formulas  elementary)  or  a  compound  of  these 
letters,  of  the  signs  employed  as  sentential  connectives, 
and  of  the  parentheses.  We  agree  to  place  each  ele- 
mentary formula  in  one  of  two  mutually  exclusive  and 
exhaustive  classes  Ki  and  K2.  Formulas  that  are  not 
elementary  are  placed  in  these  classes  pursuant  to  the 
following  conventions 

i)  A  formula  having  the  form  Si  V  S2  is 
placed  in  class  K2  if  both  Si  and  S2  are  in  K2; 
otherwise,  it  is  placed  in  Ki. 

ii)  A  formula  having  the  form  Si  3  S2  is 
placed  in  K2,  if  Si  is  in  Ki  and  S2  is  in  K2; 
otherwise,  it  is  placed  in  Ki. 

iii)  A  formula  having  the  form  Si  •  S2  is 


Notes     111 


placed  in  Ki,  if  both  Si  and  S2  are  in  Ki; 
otherwise,  it  is  placed  in  K2. 

iv)  A  formula  having  the  form  ^  S  is 
placed  in  K2,  if  S  is  in  Ki;  otherwise,  it  is 
placed  in  Ki. 


We  then  define  the  property  of  being  tautologous  a 
formula  is  a  tautology  if,  and  only  if,  it  falls  in  the 
class  Ki  no  matter  in  which  of  the  two  classes  its  ele- 
mentary constituents  are  placed.  It  is  clear  that  the 
property  of  being  a  tautology  has  now  been  described 
without  using  any  model  or  interpretation  for  the  sys- 
tem. We  can  discover  whether  or  not  a  formula  is  a 
tautology  simply  by  testing  its  structure  by  the  above 
conventions. 

Such  an  examination  shows  that  each  of  the  four 
axioms  is  a  tautology.  A  convenient  procedure  is  to 
construct  a  table  that  lists  all  the  possible  ways  in  which 
the  elementary  constituents  of  a  given  formula  can  be 
placed  in  the  two  classes.  From  this  list  we  can  de- 
termine, for  each  possibility,  to  which  class  the  non- 
elementary  component  formulas  of  the  given  formula 
belong,  and  to  which  class  the  entire  formula  belongs. 
Take  the  first  axiom.  The  table  for  it  consists  of  three 
columns,  each  headed  by  one  of  the  elementary  or  non- 
elementary  component  formulas  of  the  axiom,  as  well 
as  by  the  axiom  itself.  Under  each  heading  is  indicated 
the  class  to  which  the  particular  item  belongs,  for  each 
of  the  possible  assignments  of  the  elementary  constitu- 
ents to  the  two  classes.  The  table  is  as  follows 


112     Appendix 

p 

(pv-p) 

Ka 

Kj 

K2 

K2 

(pVp)DP 
Ki 
Ki 

The  first  column  mentions  the  possible  ways  o£  classi- 
fying the  sole  elementary  constituent  of  the  axiom. 
The  second  column  assigns  the  indicated  non-elemen- 
tary component  to  a  class,  on  the  basis  of  convention  (i). 
The  last  column  assigns  the  axiom  itself  to  a  class,  on 
the  basis  of  convention  (ii).  The  final  column  shows 
that  the  first  axiom  falls  in  class  Ki,  irrespective  of  the 
class  in  which  its  sole  elementary  constituent  is  placed. 
The  axiom  is  therefore  a  tautology. 
For  the  second  axiom,  the  table  is 


p 

1 

(pq) 

P 

0(PVq) 

Kt 

Ki 

Ki 

Ki 

Ki 

K2 

Ki 

K, 

K2 

Ki 

Ki 

Ki 

K2 

K2 

K2 

Ki 

The  first  two  columns  list  the  four  possible  ways  of 
classifying  the  two  elementary  constituents  of  the  ax- 
iom. The  second  column  assigns  the  non-elementary 
component  to  a  class,  on  the  basis  of  convention  (i). 
The  last  column  does  this  for  the  axiom,  on  the  basis 
of  convention  (ii).  The  final  column  again  shows  that 
the  second  axiom  falls  in  class  Ki  for  each  of  the  four 
possible  ways  in  which  the  elementary  constituents  can 
be  classified.  The  axiom  is  therefore  a  tautology.  In  a 


Notes     113 

similar  way  the  remaining  two  axioms  can  be  shown  to 
be  tautologies. 

We  shall  also  give  the  proof  that  the  property  of 
being  a  tautology  is  hereditary  under  the  Rule  of  De- 
tachment. (The  proof  that  it  is  hereditary  under  the 
Rule  of  Substitution  will  be  left  to  the  reader.)  As- 
sume that  any  two  formulas  Si  and  Si  D  S2  are  both 
tautologies;  we  must  show  that  in  this  case  S2  is  a 
tautology.  Suppose  S2  were  not  a  tautology.  Then,  for 
at  least  one  classification  of  its  elementary  constituents, 
S2  will  fall  in  K2.  But,  by  hypothesis,  Si  is  a  tautology, 
so  that  it  will  fall  in  Ki  for  all  classifications  of  its  ele- 
mentary constituents — and,  in  particular,  for  the  classi- 
fication which  requires  the  placing  of  S2  in  K2.  Ac- 
cordingly, for  this  latter  classification,  Si  3  S2  must  fall 
in  K2,  because  of  the  second  convention.  However, 
this  contradicts  the  hypothesis  that  Si  3  S2  is  a  tau- 
tology. In  consequence,  S2  must  be  a  tautology,  on 
pain  of  this  contradiction.  The  property  of  being  a 
tautology  is  thus  transmitted  by  the  Rule  of  Detach- 
ment from  the  premises  to  the  conclusion  derivable 
from  them  by  this  Rule. 

One  final  comment  on  the  definition  of  a  tautology 
given  in  the  text.  The  two  classes  Ki  and  K2  used  in 
the  present  account  may  be  construed  as  the  classes  of 
true  and  of  false  statements,  respectively.  But  the  ac- 
count, as  we  have  just  seen,  in  no  way  depends  on  such 
an  interpretation,  even  if  the  exposition  is  more  easily 
grasped  when  the  classes  are  understood  in  this  way. 


Brief  Bibliography 


Carnap,  Rudolf 
Findlay,  J. 

Godel,  Kurt 

Kleene,  S.  C. 

Ladriere,  Jean 

Mostowski,  A. 

Quine,  W.  V.  O. 
Rosser,  Barkley 

Turing,  A.  M. 

Weyl,  Hermann 
Wilder,  R.  L. 


Logical  Syntax  o£  Language,  New  York, 

1937- 

Goedelian    sentences    a    non-numerical 

approach,    Mind,    Vol.    51    (1942),    pp. 

259-265- 

tiber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der 
Principia  Mathematica  und  verwandter 
Systeme  I,  Monatshefte  fiir  Mathematik 
und  Physik,  Vol.  38  (1931),  pp.  173-198. 

Introduction  to  Metamathematics,  New 
York,  1952. 

Les  Limitations  Internes  des  Formalismes, 
Louvain  and  Paris,  1957. 

Sentences  Undecidable  in  Formalized 
Arithmetic,  Amsterdam,  1952. 

Methods  of  Logic,  New  York,  1950. 

An  informal  exposition  of  proofs  of 
Godel's  theorems  and  Church's  theorem, 
Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic,  Vol.  4  (1939), 
pp.  53-60. 

Computing  machinery  and  intelli- 
gence, Mind,  Vol.  59  (1950),  pp.  433- 
460. 

Philosophy  of  Mathematics  and  Natural 
Science,  Princeton,  1949. 

Introduction     to     the     Foundations     of 
Mathematics,  New  York,  1952. 
115 


Ind 


ex 


absolute    proofs    of    consistency, 

26-33,  45~56  109-113 
antinomies,  23-24,  60-63,  85 
Archimedes,  5 
Aristotle,  39,  40 
arithmetic     incompleteness     of, 

6,    86,    94-95;    consistency    of, 

58,  95-97'  98 

arithmetization  of  mathematics, 
42;  of  the  formal  calculus  of 
arithmetic,  68-74;  of  meta- 
mathematics,  76-84;  and  map- 
ping, 76-77 

axiomatic  method,  4-5;  limita- 
tions of,  6,  58-59,  99 

axioms  meaning  of,  4;  of  the 
sentential  calculus,  49;  of  arith- 
metic, 103 

Bolyai,  Janos,  10 

Boole,  George,  40,  41,  42 

calculating  machines  and  human 

intelligence,  100 
calculus   and   formalization,    26- 

27  33 

Cantor,  Georg,  23,  97n 

class  notion  of,  16;  mathemati- 
cal theory  of,  23 

completeness,  55-56,  94-95 

consistency  meaning  of,  6;  prob- 
lem of,  8-25;  and  truth,  14;  of 
Euclidean  geometry,  14,  18; 
of  non-Euclidean  geometry,  15, 
17-19;  relative  proofs  of,  15- 
23;  absolute  proofs  of,  26-33; 
of  the  sentential  calculus,  45- 
56,  109-113;  formalized  defini- 


tion of,  50-51;  of  arithmetic, 

58,  95-97^  98 
demonstration,  definition  of,  46 
Descartes,  Rene-,  7 
descriptive  predicates,  12 

elementary  signs,  46,  69 

essential   incompleteness,   86,   94 

Euclid,  9,  10,  14,  15,  18,  19,  20, 

2i»  39,  56;  his  proof  that  there 

is   no   largest   prime   number, 

36-38,  104-109 

finite  models,  21-22,  25 
finitistic  proofs,  33,  34n 
formal  logic  its  codification,  37- 

44 

formalization  of  deductive  sys- 
tems, 12-13,  26-27;  °f  tne  sen 
tential  calculus,  45-50,  109- 
111;  limits  of,  101 

formation  rules,  45,  47 

formula  in  a  calculus,  29,  33,  45, 

47 
Frege,  Gottlob,  42,  43,  44 

Gauss,  Karl  F.,  10 

Gentzen,  Gerhard,  97 

Godel,  Kurt,  3,  4,  6,  10,  26,  37,  45, 
56,  57,  58,  59,  66,  67,  68,  69,  70, 
71,  72,  73,  74,  75,  76,  77,  78,  79, 
80,  81,  82,  85,  86,  87,  88,  89, 
90,  91,  94,  98,  100,  101,  102;  his 
Platonic  realism,  99 

Godel  numbering,  68-76 

Godel  sentence,  89 

Goldbach's  conjecture,  59 

hereditary  property,  51-52,  113 
Hilbert,  David,  12,  13,  20,  21,  26, 


117 


n8     Index 


28,  32,  33,  3411,  36,  57,  58,  64, 
97  98,  99 

implicit  definition,  i3n 

incompleteness,  56,  86;  of  arith- 
metic, 6,  86,  94-95;  essential, 
58-59,  86 

inference,  rules  of,  38,  39 

intuitive  knowledge,  14,  23,   101 

Kant,  Immanuel,  40 

Lobachevsky,  Nikolai,  10 
logical  constants,  46 

mapping  idea  of,  57-67;  of  meta- 
mathematics,  76-84,  93 

mathematical  induction,  axiom 
of,  103 

mathematics  as  science  of  quan- 
tity, 11;  pure  and  applied,  12 

meta-mathematics,  28-32;  and  the 
theory  of  chess,  34-35 

models  and  proofs  of  consist- 
ency, 15-21,  25,  109;  finite  and 
non-finite,  22,  25 

modus  ponens,  48,  105 

name-forms,  85n,  88n 
names  of  expressions,  3on,  3  m 
non-Euclidean  geometry,  consist- 
ency of,  10,  15-18 
non-finite  models,  22,  25 
number,  definition  of,  42-43 
numeral  and  number,  83 
numerical  variable,  70 

omega-consistency,  9m 

Pappus,  theorem  of,  64-65 
paradoxes,  23-24,  60-63 
parallel  axiom  Euclidean,  9-10; 

non-Euclidean,  15,  18 
Peano,  Giuseppe,  103 
predicate  variable,  71-72 
primitive  formula,  46,  48-49 
Principia  Mathematica,  3,  37,  42, 

43'  44»  45'  48,  68n 


proof  Hilbert's  theory  of,  32-36; 
definition  of,  46,  74n 

quantification  theory,  38,  109 
quantifiers,  88,  106,  107 
quotation  marks  in  names  for  ex- 
pressions, 3  m 

reduction  of  arithmetic  to  logic, 

42 
relative  proofs  of  consistency,  15- 

23 
Richard,  Jules,  60 
Richard  Paradox,  60-63,  66,  85, 

gon 
Riemann,  Bernhard,  10,  15,  17- 

19 
Rosser,  J.  Barkley,  gin 
rule   of  substitution,  39,  47-48, 

50,  104;  of  detachment,  48,  50, 

105 
Russell,  Bertrand,  3,   13,  23,  24, 

37,  42,  43,  44 
Russell's  Paradox,  24,  62 

self -evidence    of    Euclidean    ax- 
ioms, 9-10;  and  intuition,  14 
sentential  connectives,  46 
sentential  variable,  71 
statement-form,  84-85 

tautology,  52-54,  109-113 
theorem,  definition  of,  46 
transfinite    induction,    principle 

of,  97n 
transfinite  ordinals,  97n 
transformation  rules,   39,  47-48, 

50,  104-105 

undecidability,  86,  92-93 
use  and  mention,  88n,  gon 

variables,  29,  39,  46;  numerical, 
70;  sentential,  71;  predicate,  71 

Whitehead,  Alfred  N.,  3,  37,  42 


Dat 


MAK  13  20IPV  «4  2«ff 


OCT  0  1  ZUU 


MAY  1  3  2002 





I 


N  I- 


MARSJON  SCIENCE  UBRAffi 


Godel's  proof 

510.1  N147g 


Main 


3  lHtE  02007  3bl4 


^ 